
Lucknow, a city that boasts a rich history, culture, food, and streets that are famous for its Awadhi and Mughlai cuisine. Mouthwatering Tundey Kebabs, Biryani, irresistible Chicken Masala are something that comes to our mind when we think of Lucknow. The streets of Lucknow are a foodie’s paradise, every 100 meters there is a different stall, a different aroma, and a secret recipe that will blow your mind. People from all over the world travel to Lucknow to taste local delicacies which have been perfected over generations and it has always been a popular choice amongst tourists, especially for its food. From juicy Kebabs to drool-worthy Biryani to creamy Malai Makhan, there are endless options for you to try here. Here’s your guide to some of the best street food in Lucknow to taste the best Nawabi culinary feasts.
10 Best Street Food in Lucknow
From Irdis’s Biryani to Rahim’s Kulcha Nihari, our list covers all the best food you can try in the city of Nawabs. Read to know more!
Kebab Biryani Basket Chaat Kulcha Nihari Malai Makhan Chole Bature Sheermal Kulfi Faluda Veg Kebab Parantha Kachori
1. Kebab

Ruling the streets of Lucknow for ages, kebabs are something, that is very sacred to the city and definitely the best street food in Lucknow. Your trip to this city won’t be complete without trying these lip-smacking kebabs. A crispy outer layer with a soft filling inside, these kebabs are cooked until they are tender enough to dissolve in your mouth. Best complemented with rumaali roti, one can also find veg options for this delicacy. Galouti Kebabs, Tundey Kebabs, and Veg Shami kebab are some of the must-try.
Best Place to try: Tunday Kababi
Cost: ₹50 per plate
The 8 Top Romantic Restaurants in Lucknow For A Fancy Evening
2. Biryani

For a city that boasts Nawabi culture and cuisine, Biryani is something that cannot be missed here. Another famous dish on our list of the best food in Lucknow is Biryani. Famous for its aroma and flavours, the slow-cooked rice with spices, vegetables, and chunks of meat, will blow your mind as you take the first bite. From mutton to chicken to even veg biryani there are many options for you to try here. Veg Handi Dum biryani, Awadhi Biryani and Mutton Biryani are a must-try.
Best Place to try: Wahid Biryani, Aminabad, or Idris
Cost: ₹100-150 per plate
3. Basket Chaat

No street food list can be completed without including chaats in it. The spicy, flavourful, and tangy tastes are enough to satiate your taste buds. Another famous food from the streets of Lucknow is Basket Chaat. A crispy potato shelling filled with mashed potatoes, tangy chutney, lots of vegetables, and peas. The best street food in Lucknow, basket chaat is a must-try if you are looking for a filling yet flavourful snack.
Best Place to try: Royal Cafe or Shukla Chaat House in Hazratganj
Cost: ₹120 per plate
20 Best Restaurants In Lucknow You Must Visit In 2022 To Eat And Feel Like The Nawabs Do
4. Kulcha Nihari

Definitely a treat for all non-veg lovers, Kulcha Nihari is a famous Mulghai dish from the streets of Lucknow. Nihari is meat served in a thick, flavourful gravy, with Kulcha which is soft bread, unlike the usual Punjabi kulchas. Raheem’s in Akbari Gate in Chowk is the best place to eat in Lucknow, to get the actual taste of this royal dish. This 125-year-old shop opens early in the morning and is always flooded with people till late at night.
Best Place to try: Rahim’s
Cost: ₹60 for one plate
5. Malai Makhan

Mostly served during the winter season, Malai Makhan is another one of the specialties of Lucknow. Best described as cream butter, this treat is made with unsalted butter which is hung in a bucket overnight and then beaten to get that creamy air-like texture. It is then topped with khoya, which makes it irresistible. Winter in Lucknow is incomplete without Malai Makhan, it is definitely the best food in Lucknow. Outside Gole Darwaza, Chowk, Chappan Bhog and Ram Arsey are some of the best places to try it.
Best Place to try: Ram Asrey or Chhappan Bhog
Cost: ₹360/kg
16 Popular Hill Stations Near Lucknow For An Enthralling Vacay In The Himalayas In 2022
6. Chole Bature

When talking about the best street food in Lucknow, we cannot miss Chole Bature. A part of almost all the street foods, we can never get enough of them. Chickpea curry made with extra spices and served with crispy bhature is something that is hard to resist. But there is something special about the Chole Bature in Lucknow, one can easily find them in every bylane of the city with a special taste. The lassi and spiced onions served with it adds to the taste.
Best Place to try: Sardar Ke Chole Bhature
Cost: ₹35- 100 per plate
7. Sheermal

Famous for its Mughlai cuisine, Lucknow offers a variety of bread, each one with a slight twist to it. Sheermal is a sweet naan that is kneaded with milk or sheer, this sweet tasting naan is served with spicy curries to balance out and enhance the taste of the dish. These naans are baked in a tandoor and are sprinkled with cardamom or saffron milk, you can also enjoy it by itself or with a cup of tea. If you want to try, Sheermal Chowk is the best place to eat in Lucknow.
Best Place to try: Chowk
Cost: ₹10 onwards, depending on the variety of Sheermal
12 Places To Visit In Lucknow That Showcase It’s Grand Culture In 2022
8. Kulfi Faluda

Another best street food in Lucknow is Kulfi Faluda, perfect to beat the heat waves of summer. This treat is perfect to satiate your sweet tooth. It is quite famous amongst tourists and the locals and you can easily find it in every corner of the street. Kulfi is made with milk, with added nuts and flavors to it, which is then topped with faluda and other syrups to enhance the taste. Prakash ki Kulfi in Aminabad is the best place to try it.
Best Place to try: Prakash ki Kulfi
Cost: ₹120 (half) and ₹60 (full)
9. Veg Kebab Parantha

Apart from all the non-vegetarian options, Lucknow has some great options for vegetarians as well and veg Kebab Paratha is one of them. One of the best foods in Lucknow, this dish can be enjoyed for breakfast or even with a cup of tea. Soft rumali roti stuffed with crispy kebabs with enriching flavors is something you will remember for a long time. Veg Kebab Roll and Kebab Paratha plate are 2 variants you can try here.
Best Place to try: Chappan Bhog or Kapoorthala
Cost: ₹25 one plate
Privately Run Tejas Express From Lucknow To Delhi Is The First In India
10. Kachori

An amazing breakfast option and popular street food in Lucknow. Khasta Kachoris are definitely one of the most popular and affordable options on the streets of Lucknow. It is popular as a breakfast option amongst the locals and even tourists. The crispy Kachori served with deep-fried aloo sabzi and white chickpea sabzi is enough to fill your stomach and your heart. Ratti Lal’s in Aminabad is the best place to try these.
Best Place to try: Rati Lal’s Khasta Kachori
Cost: ₹14 per piece
Now that we have given you all the good reasons to visit Lucknow and try some of the most delectable dishes. What are you waiting for? Plan a trip to Lucknow and try some of the best street food in Lucknow and treat your taste buds with a burst of flavours. 
For our editorial codes of conduct and copyright disclaimer, please click here. 
Frequently Asked Questions About Street Food in Lucknow


What is the famous food of Lucknow?


						Lucknow is full of amazing options when it comes to food. Tundey Kebab, Irdis ki Biryani, Chicken Masala, Malai Makhan, Khasta Kachori are some of the famous food of Lucknow.                    





What is the famous street food of Uttar Pradesh?


						Offering a wide variety of street food options to snack on, Lucknow is very famous for its Kebabs, Paya, Sheermal and Biryani.                     





Is it safe to visit Lucknow given the covid situation?


						Yes, it is safe to visit Lucknow given that you follow all the guidelines and take necessary precautions wherever required. Make sure to wear masks at all times, maintain social distancing and sanitize your hands regularly to avoid the spread of virus.                    





What is the famous sweet of Lucknow?


						Makhan Malai is the speciality of Lucknow, made with foamed malai which is then topped with dry fruits, saffron and sugar.                     





What are healthy street food options?


						Dahi Bada, Dhokla, Dosa, Idli, Kebab, corn, sweet potato chaat are some of the healthy street food options.                    





What are the famous foods of Gujarat?


						Khaman Dhokla, Thepla, Khakra, Fafda-Jalebi, Khandvi, Gathiya, Surati-Undhiyu are some of the famous foods of Gujarat.                     





Which is the food capital of India?


						With endless food options, from street food to fancy restaurants. Delhi is known as the food capital of India.                    





Which Indian city has the tastiest street food?


						India is known for its numerous cultures and traditions. And with different cultures comes different food options. Some of the famous places for street foods are Delhi, Amritsar, Kolkata, Lucknow and Indore.                    




People Also Read:
Street food in Delhi Street food in Agra Street food in Darjeeling

Here is a list of places to eat in Lucknow:
Tunday Kababi
Rahim’s Kulcha Nahari
Ratti Lal’s Khasta
Prakash ki Kulfi
Sharma Tea Stall
Jain Chat Wala
Raja Thandai
Makhan Malai Chowk
Idris ki Biryani
Chappan Bhog ki Mithaiyan
Chole Bhature at Chowk
Basket Chaat at Gomti Nagar
Sheermal at Chowk
Awadhi Biryani at Wahid's Biryani
1. Tunday Kababi
Tunday kababi, lucknow food
Tunday Kababi (source)

This place defines Lucknow food in so many ways. Whoever visits this place, cannot forget the taste of these uniquely spiced kebabs for a very long time. The meat tends to dissolve in the mouth instantly and is best complimented with roomali rotis. The Chowk outlet serves only beef kebabs while the Aminabad outlet serves both mutton and beef kebabs at a very cheap price. So eat as much as you want without burning a hole in your pocket!

2. Rahim’s Kulcha Nahari
Rahim Kucha Nahari, lucknow famous food
Rahim ke kulche nahari (Source)

Imagine tender pieces of meat marinated in an exotic spice rub and cooked overnight, stuffed into freshly baked tandoori kulche. After tunday kebabs, nahari kulcha is the second most famous food jewel of Lucknow food and cuisine. All you need to do is imagine heaven on a plate.

3. Ratti Lal’s Khasta
Ratti Lal's khasta, Lucknow food
Ratti Lal’s khasta (Source)

Breakfast in Lucknow is nothing short of a Nawabi treat and one of the best breakfast destinations has to be Rati Lal’s Khasta Kachori. The Barras and Pooris served here are no match to the khastas. The chickpea subzi is equally delicious and for the ones who love chillies there is a red chilli aloo available as well. They truly believe that one should feast like a king at breakfast!

 4. Prakash ki Kulfi
Prakash Kulfi, Lucknow famous food
Prakash ki kulfi (Source)

Lucknow food will never disappoint the ones with a sweet tooth. One of the major competition in desserts is Prakash ki Kulfi. They serve only kulfi faloodas in their shop and it’s made within the blink of an eye! If the attraction had a colour, it would have been yellow!

 5. Sharma Tea Stall
Sharma Tea Stall, Lucknow food
Bun Makkhan and tea at Sharma Tea Stall 

A visit to Lucknow is incomplete without a visit to Sharma ji. The Bun-Makkhan is something to die for! Freshly baked buns smothered in homemade butter…need I say something more? The samosas are stuffed with a subtly delicious potato mix which perfectly complements the already perfect cup of tea served right here in Hazratganj!

6. Jain Chat Wala
Jain Chaat Wala, Lucknow famous food
Jain Chaat Wala Source

Located near Lalbagh Novelty, this place is the ultimate chat haven. Loyal customers swear by their dahi batashe and aloo tikki. For a city obsessed with meat, this place is a pleasant diversion. Their quick service is the reason why people keep coming.

7. Raja Thandai
Raja Thandai, Food Of Lucknow
Raja Thandai Source

In the beer-vodka age, Raja thandai plays a major role in keeping thandai a favourite among Lucknowites. Customers like the drink because it is herbal and helps in digestion and not to mention incredibly delicious! Into service since the past 100 years, Raja Thandai is definitely the place to be when in Lucknow!

8. Makhan Malai Chowk
Makkhan Malai, Lucknow famous food
Makkhan Malai Source

Winters are incomplete without makhan malai. It is conceptually similar to Old Delhi’s daulat ki chaat, but much more intense and flavourful. The dish in itself is light and fluffy, but very creamy in texture. The sprinkling of khoya added on top by the vendors makes it irresistible. This seasonal dish is an integral part of Lucknow food.

9. Idris ki Biryani
Idris ki Biryani (Source)
Idris ki Biryani Source

For a culture well versed with Nawabi royalty, biryani may seem to be a very usual dish. However, Idris ki Biryani stands out among the rest. Chunky pieces of chicken/mutton surrounded by a plate full of handpicked, fluffy, long-grain rice is too good to miss out on. Known for their flavour and aroma, the recipe is almost half a century old.

10.  Chappan Bhog ki Mithaiyan
Chappan Bhog, Lucknow food
Chappan Bhog Sweets Source

This Lucknow food place has been an undisputed king of the sweetmeat world. With a wide range of attractively decorated mithai available in front of your eyes, anyone can get tempted. Made from unadulterated milk and milk products, you can vouch on their quality and taste, even with your eyes blindfolded.

11. Chole Bhature at Chowk
Chole Bhature at Chowk Lucknow street food
Source
Chole Bhature is a very famous dish from Punjab. It consists of a curry made of chickpeas often made extra spicy served with ‘Bhatures’ which are hot in the inside and crispy on the outside. The dish served at Chowk in Lucknow is finger licking good. The flavours are on point and it feels like you are in Punjab instantly. The dish is served piping hot with onions and coriander leaves as garnish. And the best part is, you can ask for more servings.  The dish is so iconic that people often crowd at this spot hours before they even start serving. Please note that it is served in the morning and evening only. Owing to its popularity and demand, each batch made runs out quickly, so line up early if you want to taste this iconic dish in Chowk.

12. Basket Chaat at Gomti Nagar - Best Street Food in Lucknow
Basket Chaat at Gomti Nagar
Source
Chaat is a quintessential dish in India. Every Indian state manages to put their own spin to it. Some states prefer to keep it spicy and some like it tangy. Some even like it with curd and some like it mashed. One of the most famous chaats in Lucknow is basket chaat. The basket chaat is made of a potato shelling which is filled to the brim with mashed Tikkis, tangy and spicy sauces or chutneys and loads of vegetables, often peas. The dish is very affordable, yummy and very filling at the same time.

13. Sheermal at Chowk
Sheermal at Chowk Lucknow
Source
Sheermal or Shirmal is a very famous delicacy prepared in Lucknow.  It is a saffron-coloured naan or flatbread. The dish is mildly sweet and made with milk, yeast and maida. The ingredients are mixed and allowed to sit for a while. The yeast in it causes it to rise and then it is baked in the famous tandoor or Indian oven. It is enjoyed with a cup of chai or even on its own. You must try this dish on your visit to Lucknow. The dish is also prepared in Hyderabad but no ones does it better than the Lucknowis.

14. Awadhi Biryani at Wahid's Biryani
Awadhi Biryani in Lucknow
Source
The Awadhi biryani was a discovery made by the tenth rule of the Awadh or Oudh dynasty. Wahid's Biryani is a small restaurant that sells what is known as 'the best biryani in Lucknow'. Although the restaurant is a bit small, it does not matter since the mouth-watering biryani is all the reason you need to go here. 
The Awadhi biryani is made of meat and rice. They are cooked separately and then mixed over dum. The flavours are very light but together they pack quite a punch. The biryani is absolutely sinful and often the cheat meal of all Lucknowis.
