The mouth-watering Lucknowi biryani is something you can’t miss. This delicacy is prepared by slow-cooking rice with different spices, vegetables, yoghurt, mint leaves, fried onions and other ingredients. It is then topped with fried potatoes, coriander leaves and nuts and served hot with raita or gravy. The non-vegetarian varieties with marinated pieces of chicken or mutton are a special delicacy in the city. And to relish the best biryani in Lucknow, you need not go too far. The popular Lucknow street food joints are known for serving some of the finest biryanis at pocket-friendly rates. From non-vegetarian varieties like butter chicken biryani, seekh kebab biryani, sufiyani chicken biryani and Hyderabadi chicken biryani to vegetarian delights like veg handi dum biryani, paneer biryani and veg kofta biryani, the options are aplenty. Lucknowi biryani can be spicy. So, if your tongue is sensitive to spicy foods, remember to order one with medium or less spice.
When you are in Lucknow, you got to enjoy kebabs. A delicacy in the city, kebabs are counted among the most yummy and versatile Lucknowi foods relished by all. This popular snack can be prepared in different ways with a range of vegetables, meat, spices and other ingredients to suit different palates. Both locals and tourists blindly vouch for this melt-in-the-mouth street food; no wonder most Lucknow street food stalls and eateries selling this item are always crowded. Tunday kebabs, galawati kebabs and vegetarian shami kebabs are some top favourites. 

Best Places to Try:
Tunday Kababi, Khayali Ganj
The Awadh’s Dastarkhwan, Gomti Nagar
Street food stalls along the Chowk area

Ever heard of something like this before? Well, veg kebab paratha is one of the most loved street foods not only in Lucknow but in all of Uttar Pradesh. This popular vegetarian breakfast is prepared by stuffing soft rumali rotis with some crispy and flavoursome kebabs. Veg kebab paratha is best enjoyed with a hot cup of tea or coffee. Although a popular breakfast item in the city, it makes for a good evening snack as well. And apart from veg kebab parathas, you must try vegetarian kebab rolls, a variant of this famous Lucknowi street food. 

Best Places to Try:
Deva Food Mart, Chandralok
Tunday Kababi, Khayali Ganj

Also known as tokri chaat, this one is a popular dish in Lucknow. This lip-smacking chaat item is prepared by filling an edible crispy tokri with mashed potatoes, bhalle, boiled green gram dal, different types of chutneys and curd. It is finally garnished with pomegranate seeds, sev and masalas and served immediately. So, in case you find yourself craving a lip-smacking chaat item during city tours, basket chaat is what you should go for.

Best Places to Try:
Royal Café, Hazratganj
Shukla Chaat House, Hazratganj
Fast food joints in Gomti Nagar

Malai makhan, also known as Nimish, is a creamy, fluffy and flavourful sweet dish available in Lucknow only during the winter season. It is prepared with freshly obtained unsalted butter, powdered sugar, cardamom powder and yellow colour, and topped with lots of khoya and chopped nuts. Sounds delectable, doesn’t it? This amazing, melt-in-the-mouth sweet dish is truly a delight for the palate. If you happen to plan a trip to Lucknow during the winter season, malai makhan is something you must try at least once. 

Best Places to Try:
Bajpai Kachori Bhandar, Hazratganj
Moti Mahal Restaurant, Lalbagh
Near Gol Darwaza in Chowk

If you enjoy non-vegetarian cuisine, you ought to try kulcha nihari in Lucknow. Nihari is a popular Mughlai dish prepared with chunks of marinated mutton and a range of herbs and spices. What’s special about this meat curry is that it is simmered with herbs and spices overnight on a low fire, and the result is totally delish. This flavourful curry is then served with warm and fluffy kulchas, fried onions and lemon slices. The dish is so popular that it is easily available in many of Lucknow’s famous food Hence, remember to try some whenever you get a chance. 

Best Places to Try:
Raheem’s Kulcha-Nahari, Chowk
Mubeen’s, Chowk

In the summer, a hawker selling falooda kulfi can be seen on every corner of the Lucknow streets. Falooda kulfi is the preferred dessert among Lucknow residents, and it may be giving the wildly popular ice cream some serious competition. Once you take a bite of this mouthwateringly sweet, creamy, nutty delight, you'll understand why. If you want to end your Lucknow food tour on a sweet note, you must eat the city's speciality dessert, the falooda kulfi.

Where to have it: Prakash ki Mashoor Kulfi, Bhishambhar mansion, Main Chowk Circle, Lalji Tandon Marg, Lucknow


The mouth-watering Lucknowi biryani is something you can’t miss. This delicacy is prepared by slow-cooking rice with different spices, vegetables, yoghurt, mint leaves, fried onions and other ingredients. It is then topped with fried potatoes, coriander leaves and nuts and served hot with raita or gravy. The non-vegetarian varieties with marinated pieces of chicken or mutton are a special delicacy in the city. And to relish the best biryani in Lucknow, you need not go too far. The popular Lucknow street food joints are known for serving some of the finest biryanis at pocket-friendly rates. From non-vegetarian varieties like butter chicken biryani, seekh kebab biryani, sufiyani chicken biryani and Hyderabadi chicken biryani to vegetarian delights like veg handi dum biryani, paneer biryani and veg kofta biryani, the options are aplenty. Lucknowi biryani can be spicy. So, if your tongue is sensitive to spicy foods, remember to order one with medium or less spice.


Here is a list of places to eat in Lucknow:
Tunday Kababi
Rahim’s Kulcha Nahari
Ratti Lal’s Khasta
Prakash ki Kulfi
Sharma Tea Stall
Jain Chat Wala
Raja Thandai
Makhan Malai Chowk
Idris ki Biryani
Chappan Bhog ki Mithaiyan
Chole Bhature at Chowk
Basket Chaat at Gomti Nagar
Sheermal at Chowk
Awadhi Biryani at Wahid's Biryani
1. Tunday Kababi
Tunday kababi, lucknow food
Tunday Kababi (source)

This place defines Lucknow food in so many ways. Whoever visits this place, cannot forget the taste of these uniquely spiced kebabs for a very long time. The meat tends to dissolve in the mouth instantly and is best complimented with roomali rotis. The Chowk outlet serves only beef kebabs while the Aminabad outlet serves both mutton and beef kebabs at a very cheap price. So eat as much as you want without burning a hole in your pocket!

2. Rahim’s Kulcha Nahari
Rahim Kucha Nahari, lucknow famous food
Rahim ke kulche nahari (Source)

Imagine tender pieces of meat marinated in an exotic spice rub and cooked overnight, stuffed into freshly baked tandoori kulche. After tunday kebabs, nahari kulcha is the second most famous food jewel of Lucknow food and cuisine. All you need to do is imagine heaven on a plate.

3. Ratti Lal’s Khasta
Ratti Lal's khasta, Lucknow food
Ratti Lal’s khasta (Source)

Breakfast in Lucknow is nothing short of a Nawabi treat and one of the best breakfast destinations has to be Rati Lal’s Khasta Kachori. The Barras and Pooris served here are no match to the khastas. The chickpea subzi is equally delicious and for the ones who love chillies there is a red chilli aloo available as well. They truly believe that one should feast like a king at breakfast!

 4. Prakash ki Kulfi
Prakash Kulfi, Lucknow famous food
Prakash ki kulfi (Source)

Lucknow food will never disappoint the ones with a sweet tooth. One of the major competition in desserts is Prakash ki Kulfi. They serve only kulfi faloodas in their shop and it’s made within the blink of an eye! If the attraction had a colour, it would have been yellow!

 5. Sharma Tea Stall
Sharma Tea Stall, Lucknow food
Bun Makkhan and tea at Sharma Tea Stall 

A visit to Lucknow is incomplete without a visit to Sharma ji. The Bun-Makkhan is something to die for! Freshly baked buns smothered in homemade butter…need I say something more? The samosas are stuffed with a subtly delicious potato mix which perfectly complements the already perfect cup of tea served right here in Hazratganj!

6. Jain Chat Wala
Jain Chaat Wala, Lucknow famous food
Jain Chaat Wala Source

Located near Lalbagh Novelty, this place is the ultimate chat haven. Loyal customers swear by their dahi batashe and aloo tikki. For a city obsessed with meat, this place is a pleasant diversion. Their quick service is the reason why people keep coming.

7. Raja Thandai
Raja Thandai, Food Of Lucknow
Raja Thandai Source

In the beer-vodka age, Raja thandai plays a major role in keeping thandai a favourite among Lucknowites. Customers like the drink because it is herbal and helps in digestion and not to mention incredibly delicious! Into service since the past 100 years, Raja Thandai is definitely the place to be when in Lucknow!

8. Makhan Malai Chowk
Makkhan Malai, Lucknow famous food
Makkhan Malai Source

Winters are incomplete without makhan malai. It is conceptually similar to Old Delhi’s daulat ki chaat, but much more intense and flavourful. The dish in itself is light and fluffy, but very creamy in texture. The sprinkling of khoya added on top by the vendors makes it irresistible. This seasonal dish is an integral part of Lucknow food.

9. Idris ki Biryani
Idris ki Biryani (Source)
Idris ki Biryani Source

For a culture well versed with Nawabi royalty, biryani may seem to be a very usual dish. However, Idris ki Biryani stands out among the rest. Chunky pieces of chicken/mutton surrounded by a plate full of handpicked, fluffy, long-grain rice is too good to miss out on. Known for their flavour and aroma, the recipe is almost half a century old.

10.  Chappan Bhog ki Mithaiyan
Chappan Bhog, Lucknow food
Chappan Bhog Sweets Source

This Lucknow food place has been an undisputed king of the sweetmeat world. With a wide range of attractively decorated mithai available in front of your eyes, anyone can get tempted. Made from unadulterated milk and milk products, you can vouch on their quality and taste, even with your eyes blindfolded.

11. Chole Bhature at Chowk
Chole Bhature at Chowk Lucknow street food
Source
Chole Bhature is a very famous dish from Punjab. It consists of a curry made of chickpeas often made extra spicy served with ‘Bhatures’ which are hot in the inside and crispy on the outside. The dish served at Chowk in Lucknow is finger licking good. The flavours are on point and it feels like you are in Punjab instantly. The dish is served piping hot with onions and coriander leaves as garnish. And the best part is, you can ask for more servings.  The dish is so iconic that people often crowd at this spot hours before they even start serving. Please note that it is served in the morning and evening only. Owing to its popularity and demand, each batch made runs out quickly, so line up early if you want to taste this iconic dish in Chowk.

12. Basket Chaat at Gomti Nagar - Best Street Food in Lucknow
Basket Chaat at Gomti Nagar
Source
Chaat is a quintessential dish in India. Every Indian state manages to put their own spin to it. Some states prefer to keep it spicy and some like it tangy. Some even like it with curd and some like it mashed. One of the most famous chaats in Lucknow is basket chaat. The basket chaat is made of a potato shelling which is filled to the brim with mashed Tikkis, tangy and spicy sauces or chutneys and loads of vegetables, often peas. The dish is very affordable, yummy and very filling at the same time.

13. Sheermal at Chowk
Sheermal at Chowk Lucknow
Source
Sheermal or Shirmal is a very famous delicacy prepared in Lucknow.  It is a saffron-coloured naan or flatbread. The dish is mildly sweet and made with milk, yeast and maida. The ingredients are mixed and allowed to sit for a while. The yeast in it causes it to rise and then it is baked in the famous tandoor or Indian oven. It is enjoyed with a cup of chai or even on its own. You must try this dish on your visit to Lucknow. The dish is also prepared in Hyderabad but no ones does it better than the Lucknowis.

14. Awadhi Biryani at Wahid's Biryani
Awadhi Biryani in Lucknow
Source
The Awadhi biryani was a discovery made by the tenth rule of the Awadh or Oudh dynasty. Wahid's Biryani is a small restaurant that sells what is known as 'the best biryani in Lucknow'. Although the restaurant is a bit small, it does not matter since the mouth-watering biryani is all the reason you need to go here. 
The Awadhi biryani is made of meat and rice. They are cooked separately and then mixed over dum. The flavours are very light but together they pack quite a punch. The biryani is absolutely sinful and often the cheat meal of all Lucknowis.

What is the Famous Food of Lucknow?
Tunday Kebabs, Khasta, Kormans, Makhan Malai, Awadi Biryani, Nahari-Kulchas, Roomali Rotis, Sheermal and Warqi Parathas

Now that we've listed out what to eat in Lucknow, prepare your appetite to binge on these scrumptious delicacies. 
