Hotels In Lucknow :
1. Hotel Sarvin
Location :  CP-119 Viraj Khand Gomti Nagar, Gomti Nagar, 226010 Lucknow, India
Description : You're eligible for a Genius discount at Hotel Sarvin! To save at this property, all you have to do is sign in. Located in Lucknow, within 13 km of Lucknow University and 4.2 km of Indira Gandhi Pratishthan, Hotel Sarvin provides accommodation with a restaurant and free WiFi throughout the property as well as free private parking for guests who drive. The property is around 5.9 km from Ambedkar Park, 11 km from KD Singh Stadium and 13 km from Lucknow Junction Railway Station. The accommodation features room service, a 24-hour front desk and currency exchange for guests.
At the hotel each room comes with air conditioning, a desk, a flat-screen TV, a private bathroom, bed linen, towels and a terrace with a city view. Guest rooms in Hotel Sarvin are equipped with a coffee machine and a computer.
The nearest airport is Chaudhary Charan Singh International Airport, 19 km from the accommodation.
Most popular facilities : Free WiFi, Airport shuttle (free), Free parking, Family rooms, 
Restaurant, Room service, Non-smoking rooms, 24-hour front desk, Breakfast.

For Booking : https://www.booking.com/hotel/in/sarvin-lucknow1.en-gb.html?label=lucknow-VieZ4zFPRI8cdj65eu_qlQS553355269801%3Apl%3Ata%3Ap180%3Ap2%3Aac%3Aap%3Aneg%3Afi%3Atikwd-711740006%3Alp9301068%3Ali%3Adec%3Adm%3Appccp%3DUmFuZG9tSVYkc2RlIyh9YZVcNNsENnH02-pWD53qm9c&aid=306395

2. FabHotel Impact
Location :  6, Plot 6, Preeti Vihar, Kamta Chowk, Surendra Nagar,, Gomti Nagar, 226016 Lucknow, India
Description : You're eligible for a Genius discount at FabHotel Impact! To save at this property, all you have to do is sign in.
Situated within 12 km of Lucknow University and 4.6 km of Indira Gandhi Pratishthan, FabHotel Impact features rooms with air conditioning and a private bathroom in Lucknow. This 3-star hotel offers a shared kitchen and a 24-hour front desk. Staff on site can arrange a shuttle service.
At the hotel, rooms include a desk, a flat-screen TV, a private bathroom, bed linen and towels. At FabHotel Impact rooms are fitted with a seating area.
The accommodation offers an à la carte or vegetarian breakfast.
Ambedkar Park is 6.1 km from FabHotel Impact, while KD Singh Stadium is 10 km from the property. The nearest airport is Chaudhary Charan Singh International Airport, 19 km from the hotel.
Most popular facilities : Non-smoking rooms, 24-hour front desk, Exceptional breakfast

3. Hilton Garden Inn Lucknow
Location : TCG -7/7 Vibhuti Khand, Gomti Nagar, Gomti Nagar, 226010 Lucknow, India
Description : Situated in Lucknow, 11 km from Lucknow University, Hilton Garden Inn Lucknow features accommodation with an outdoor swimming pool, free private parking, a fitness centre and a garden. Less than 1 km from Indira Gandhi Pratishthan and 5.1 km from Ambedkar Park, the property offers a terrace and a bar. The accommodation provides a 24-hour front desk, airport transfers, room service and free WiFi throughout the property.
At the hotel, the rooms include a desk. All rooms will provide guests with air conditioning, a safety deposit box and a TV.
The daily breakfast offers buffet, à la carte or continental options. At Hilton Garden Inn Lucknow you will find a restaurant serving Indian, Asian and international cuisine. Vegetarian, dairy-free and halal options can also be requested.
KD Singh Stadium is 9.4 km from the accommodation, while Lucknow Junction Railway Station is 11 km from the property. The nearest airport is Chaudhary Charan Singh International Airport, 20 km from Hilton Garden Inn Lucknow.
Couples particularly like the location — they rated it 8.6 for a two-person trip.
Most popular facilities : Outdoor swimming pool, Free WiFi, Airport shuttle, Free parking, Family rooms, Restaurant, Fitness centre, Tea/coffee maker in all rooms, Bar

4. Super OYO Natraj Inn Near SGPGI - Managed by Company
Location :  Natraj Hotel, 27 Saraswati Puram, Utrathia, Rae Bareli Road, 226014 Lucknow, India
Description : You're eligible for a Genius discount at Super OYO Natraj Inn Near SGPGI - Managed by Company! To save at this property, all you have to do is sign in.
Situated within 14 km of Lucknow University and 11 km of Lucknow Junction Railway Station, Super OYO Natraj Inn Near SGPGI - Managed by Company features rooms with air conditioning and a private bathroom in Lucknow. With free WiFi, this 3-star hotel offers a shared kitchen and room service. The hotel has family rooms.
At the hotel, rooms are fitted with a desk, a flat-screen TV, a private bathroom, bed linen and towels. The rooms have a wardrobe.
Speaking English and Hindi at the reception, staff are always at hand to help.
KD Singh Stadium is 13 km from Super OYO Natraj Inn Near SGPGI - Managed by Company, while Ambedkar Park is 15 km from the property. The nearest airport is Chaudhary Charan Singh International Airport, 5 km from the accommodation.
Most popular facilities : Free WiFi, Family rooms, Room service, 24-hour front desk

5. FabExpress JMD Inn
Location :  4/11 A, Vibhav Khand,Gomtinagar Lucknow, Gomti Nagar, 226010 Lucknow, India
Description : You're eligible for a Genius discount at FabExpress JMD Inn! To save at this property, all you have to do is sign in.
Set in Lucknow within 13 km of Lucknow University and 2.2 km of Indira Gandhi Pratishthan, FabExpress JMD Inn features rooms with free WiFi. The property is around 6.4 km from Ambedkar Park, 11 km from KD Singh Stadium and 13 km from Lucknow Junction Railway Station. The accommodation offers room service, a 24-hour front desk and luggage storage for guests.
The hotel offers an à la carte or vegetarian breakfast.
The nearest airport is Chaudhary Charan Singh International Airport, 20 km from FabExpress JMD Inn.
Most popular facilities : Free WiFi, Free parking, Family rooms, Room service, Non-smoking rooms, 24-hour front desk, Breakfast

6. Fairfield by Marriott Lucknow
Location :  Opposite Indira Gandhi Pratishthan, Gate No 2, Gomti Nagar, 226010 Lucknow, India

Description : Located in the city's business hub, Fairfield by Marriott Lucknow is situated in Lucknow. It features a rooftop fitness centre that offers beautiful city views. Free WiFi is available in public areas of the property. Tunday Kababi is 11 km from the property. All rooms include a flat-screen TV with satellite channels. Some rooms feature a seating area where you can relax. The rooms are fitted with a private bathroom equipped with a shower. For your comfort, you will find slippers, free toiletries and a hairdryer. You will find a 24-hour front desk at the property.
Ambedkar Park is 4.7 km, the British Residency Lucknow is 11 km and the Bara Imambara is 12.7 km. Gomtinagar Bus Station is 4 km while the Charbagh Railway Station is 11.2 km. Chaudhary Charan Singh International Airport is 26 km. Hazratganj is 8.7 km and Kakori is 32 km away. Fairfield by Marriott Lucknow is 40 km from Malihabad.

Couples particularly like the location — they rated it 8.4 for a two-person trip.

Most popular facilities : Free WiFi, Airport shuttle, Free parking, Family rooms, Restaurant, Fitness centre, Room service, Tea/coffee maker in all rooms, Bar, Good breakfast

7. FabExpress Global Inn New
Location :  2, Gomtinagar , Chinhat Sadar , Lucknow, Lucknow, 226010 Lucknow, India
Description : FabExpress Global Inn New is set in Lucknow, within 12 km of Lucknow University and 1.7 km of Indira Gandhi Pratishthan. This 3-star hotel offers a shared kitchen, room service and free WiFi. Lucknow Junction Railway Station is 12 km from the hotel. Guests at the hotel can enjoy an à la carte or a vegetarian breakfast.
FabExpress Global Inn New can conveniently provide information at the reception to help guests to get around the area. Ambedkar Park is 6.8 km from the accommodation, while KD Singh Stadium is 10 km from the property. The nearest airport is Chaudhary Charan Singh International Airport, 21 km from FabExpress Global Inn New.

Most popular facilities : Free WiFi, Room service, Non-smoking rooms, 24-hour front desk, Facilities for disabled guests, Very good breakfast

8. Renaissance Lucknow Hotel
Location : Vipin Khand, Gomti Nagar, 226010 Lucknow, India 

Description : Located in the downtown neighborhood of Gomti Nagar, the hotel offers easy access to business hubs, government offices as well as popular tourist attractions like Ambedkar Park, Bara Imambara, Chota Imambara and Rumi Darwaza. Guests can also enjoy the on-site restaurants. The property has a rooftop infinity room. Every room at this hotel is air conditioned and comes with a flat-screen TV with satellite channels. Some units have a seating area to relax in after a busy day. For your comfort, you will find slippers, free toiletries and a hair dryer. There is a 24-hour front desk at the property. Award winning dining options at the hotel include the all-day dining restaurant L-14 located on 14th floor with an interactive kitchen coupled with panoramic city views of city, Sepia, the specialty restaurant that offers authentic Lucknowi cuisine with live music, Skybar, located on the 16th floor offers breathtaking city views with finest selection of beverages, the Deli named as Coffee & Cakes located at lobby level offering heavenly aroma of freshly brewed coffee & delicious bakery and patisseries.
Chaudhary Charan Singh Airport is 13 km from the property. Hazratganj is 6.4 km while Kakori is 28 km away. Renaissance Lucknow Hotel is 31 km from Malihabad.

Couples particularly like the location — they rated it 8.8 for a two-person trip.

Most popular facilities :  Outdoor swimming pool, Free WiFi, Airport shuttle, Free parking, Family rooms, 4 restaurants, Fitness centre, Tea/coffee maker in all rooms, Bar, Good breakfast

9. Taj Mahal Lucknow
Location : Vipin Khand, Gomti Nagar, Gomti Nagar, 226010 Lucknow, India

Description : On the scenic banks of Gomti River, Taj Mahal Lucknow Gomti Nagar provides stylish rooms in downtown Lucknow. Featuring beautiful domes and graceful pillars, this grand hotel provides an outdoor pool.
Well-furnished rooms are fully air-conditioned and come with ergonomic work desks. Free tea/coffee making facilities, daily newspapers and mineral water are provided. En suite bathrooms have a bathtub.
Taj Mahal Lucknow Gomti Nagar is 20 km from Amausi International Airport and 8 km from the Railway Station. It is about 2.5 km from the Lucknow Zoo and State Museum. Guests can visit the gym for a refreshing workout, or check e-mails at the business centre. The hotel also provides a beauty salon, gift shop and 24-hour room service.
International cuisine can be enjoyed at Latitude restaurant, while North Indian and Awadhi dishes can be sampled at Oudhyana restaurant. Cocktails and light snacks can be enjoyed at SAQI bar.

Couples particularly like the location — they rated it 9.3 for a two-person trip.

Most popular facilities : Outdoor swimming pool, Free WiFi, Free parking, Family rooms, 2 restaurants, Fitness centre, Spa and wellness centre, Tea/coffee maker in all rooms, Bar, Superb breakfast

10. FabHotel Prime V Hazratganj
Location : 15,Shivaji Marg Hewett Road, Vijaya Bank Building,Lucknow-226001, 226001 Lucknow, India

Description : FabHotel Prime V Hazratganj is situated in Lucknow, 3.4 km from Lucknow University and 1.3 km from Lucknow Junction Railway Station. With free WiFi, this 3-star hotel offers room service and a 24-hour front desk. KD Singh Stadium is 2.6 km from the hotel and Ambedkar Park is 6.3 km away.
The rooms in the hotel are fitted with air conditioning, a seating area, a flat-screen TV with cable channels, a safety deposit box and a private bathroom with a shower. At FabHotel Prime V Hazratganj rooms are fitted with bed linen and towels. At the accommodation you will find a restaurant serving Chinese, Indian and Italian cuisine. Vegetarian and vegan options can also be requested. FabHotel Prime V Hazratganj offers a sun terrace.
Indira Gandhi Pratishthan is 11 km from the hotel. The nearest airport is Chaudhary Charan Singh International Airport, 10 km from FabHotel Prime V Hazratganj.

Couples particularly like the location — they rated it 8.2 for a two-person trip.

Most popular facilities : Free WiFi, Free parking, Restaurant, Room service, Non-smoking rooms, 24-hour front desk, Facilities for disabled guests, Good breakfast

11. Holiday Inn Lucknow Airport, an IHG Hotel
Location :  Kanpur Road, 226008 Lucknow, India

Description : Located in Lucknow, 13 km from Lucknow University, Holiday Inn Lucknow Airport, an IHG Hotel provides accommodation with an outdoor swimming pool, free private parking, a fitness centre and a garden. Featuring room service, this property also provides guests with a terrace. Certain rooms at the property include a balcony with a city view. The hotel will provide guests with air-conditioned rooms with a desk, a kettle, a minibar, a safety deposit box, a flat-screen TV and a private bathroom with a shower. At Holiday Inn Lucknow Airport, an IHG Hotel each room has bed linen and towels. The daily breakfast offers buffet, continental or American options. At the accommodation you will find a restaurant serving American, Chinese and British cuisine. Vegetarian, halal and vegan options can also be requested. Speaking English and Hindi at the reception, staff will be happy to provide guests with practical guidance on the area. Lucknow Junction Railway Station is 9.3 km from Holiday Inn Lucknow Airport, an IHG Hotel, while KD Singh Stadium is 12 km away. The nearest airport is Chaudhary Charan Singh International, 2 km from the hotel, and the property offers a paid airport shuttle service.

Couples particularly like the location — they rated it 8.3 for a two-person trip.

Most popular facilities : Outdoor swimming pool, Restaurant, Room service, Family rooms, Non-smoking rooms, Airport shuttle, Fitness centre, Tea/coffee maker in all rooms, Bar, Good breakfast
