Lucknow Development Authority has made the development sustainable, cost effective, time saving and more efficient on the basis of Leveraging Technology, shares Dr Indramani Tripathi (IAS), Vice Chairman, Lucknow Development Authority in an exclusive interview with Ritika Srivastava of Elets News Network (ENN). Edited excerpts:

Sustainable townships have become essential for fostering a greener and more ecofriendly urban environment. Can you elaborate on the key principles and strategies adopted by the Lucknow Development Authority to create sustainable townships within the city?

The process of development of the following self-sufficient (Sustainable) townships is in progress on the basis of the importance of eco-friendly environment and green belt as per the standards set by Industry Sustainable Practices under Lucknow Development Area.

(a) We have proposed to develop a world class Institutional Area in Education CityMohan Road scheme. Due to the availability of all the facilities related to education at one place, the scheme can be made sustainable. To balance the environment a Central Park along with extensive tree plantation is being proposed in the scheme. Plot development will also be done for housing in the scheme.

(b) Health care related facilities such as Medical Health Centre, Medical Medicine City wholesale and retail trade and storage of medicines, Ayurvedic Medical Centre, Yoga and Vipassana Centre etc. are to be developed in the Wellness CitySultanpur Road scheme. Residential and group housing plots will also be developed for the residences of persons related to these facilities to create and promote a balanced Live-Work scenario.

(c) With a view to encourage nonpolluted industrial business activities in the plan, along with industrial plots, residential plots have been planned in IT-City Sultanpur Road. Social and physical infrastructure such as commercial areas, hospitals have been planned to support the Township. The main focus of the scheme is to provide maximum employment to the aspirants while promoting industrial business.

Smart cities are often associated with leveraging technology to enhance urban living. What role does technology play in the development and management of smart cities in Lucknow?

Lucknow Development Authority has also made the development sustainable, cost effective and time saving and more efficient on the basis of Leveraging Technology. Under the works of Smart City, works of smart components have been adapted and are proposed on various roads and intersections in the city. Place making has been done in and near various public spaces.

Clean urban transport is crucial for reducing pollution and congestion in growing cities. What initiatives has the Lucknow Development Authority undertaken to promote clean and sustainable transportation options?


In the field of transportation, the Lucknow Development Authority is undertaking the construction of a 4-lane green corridor of 28.00km length from IIM road to Kisan Path. The total cost of the project is Rs 7700.00 crore. 6.00km in length in the first phase construction of 4-lane road from IIM to Pakka pul and bridge at Gaughat in progress.The Corridor will provide a smooth movement as well as lessen the distance within the city.

Affordable housing is a significant concern in many urban areas. How does the Lucknow Development Authority address this issue, and what steps are being taken to ensure that residents from diverse socioeconomic backgrounds can access quality and affordable housing within the city?

Affordable Housing for such people of Lucknow city, whose family does not have a permanent house, 4512 (G + 3) buildings are being constructed under Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana (Urban). The covered area of each building is as per PMAY guidelines. Earlier in Sharda Nagar and Basant Kunj Yojana, 4512 houses of this category were completed and allotted to the public and given possession. About 600 families have also started living in these buildings.

With rapid urbanisation, cities often face challenges in balancing development with environmental conservation. How does the Lucknow Development Authority strike a balance between urban growth and environmental preservation, particularly in the context of infrastructure projects and expansion?

There are various projects in the works to achieve Environmental and Ecological planning. Last year, 1.26 lakh saplings were planted by the Authority in the field of environmental protection and balance and this year also 1.25 lakh saplings are to be planted during the rainy season. The work of promotion/ conservation of various lakes (Such as Yamuna Jheel, Kala Pahad Lake, and Butler Palace Lake etc.) Is being done by the Lucknow Development Authority. The development work of wetland in a 37 acres area is in progress in CG City Yojana to preserve the natural state of it, so that the environmental balance is maintained with the infrastructure. On top of that there are several parks such as Fragrance Park, Amrit Vatika, Happiness Park, Miyawaki Forest at CG city, UP Darshan Park etc. are also in the development to create a healthy urban environment.