Lucknow, city, capital of Uttar Pradesh state, northern India. It is located roughly in the centre of the state, on the Gomati River about 45 miles (72 km) northeast of Kanpur.

Lucknow became important in 1528, when it was captured by Bābur, the first Mughal ruler of India. Under Akbar, his grandson, the city became part of Oudh province. Āṣaf al-Dawlah, who became nawab of Oudh (now Ayodhya) in 1775, transferred his capital from Faizabad to Lucknow. When the Indian Mutiny broke out in 1857, Sir Henry Lawrence, the British commissioner, and the European inhabitants of Lucknow were besieged for several months until rescued by British troops. The British then abandoned the city until the following year, when they regained control over India.
Lucknow is situated at the junction of numerous roads and rail lines, and Chaudhary Charan Singh International Airport is located about 6 miles (10 km) southwest of the central city. The city is a marketplace for agricultural products (mangoes, melons, and various grains are grown locally), and its industries include food processing, manufacturing, handicrafts, and railroad shops. Its population, which has grown dramatically since the late 20th century, surpassed that of Kanpur in the early 21st century to become the most-populous city in Uttar Pradesh.
Lucknow contains notable examples of architecture. The Great Imāmbāṛā (1784) is a single-storied structure where Shiʿi Muslims assemble during the month of Muḥarram. The Rumi Darwaza, or Turkish Gate, was modeled (1784) on the Sublime Porte (Bab-i Hümayun) in Istanbul. The best-preserved monument is the Residency (1800), the scene of the defense by British troops during the Indian Mutiny. A memorial commemorating the Indians who died during the uprising was erected in 1957.

Among Lucknow’s educational institutions are the University of Lucknow (founded 1921), a music academy, an institute of Muslim theology, the Central Drug Research Institute (1951), an arts-and-crafts college, and a state museum. The city also has a botanical garden and a national zoological garden. Pop. (2001) 2,185,927; (2011) 2,817,105.
