So, if you’re an art and history lover, here are the historical monuments in Lucknow you cannot miss.
Bara Imambara, built by Nawab of Awadh Asaf-ud-Daula, is one of the most important historical monuments in Lucknow. The Imambara complex consists of a baoli (stepwell) and a bhool bhulaiyya, a labyrinth with interconnected doorways. There are over 1024 ways to reach the terrace but only two ways to come back down. 
Located close to Bara Imambara is another marvelous piece of architecture in Lucknow called the Chhota Imambara. It was built in the 19th century to serve as a mausoleum for Muhammad Ali Shah, his mother, and other family members. The structure has a gilded dome and many turrets and minarets. It is a beautifully built structure known for its rich history and architecture.
The Chhatar Manzil, which translates to Umbrella Palace, is one of the most prominent historical monuments in Lucknow. It is located on the banks of River Gomti and served as a palace for many Awadh kings and their wives. The structure used to have Bari Chhattar Manzil and Choti Chhattar Manzil. Out of the two, only the larger remains now. Chhatar Manzil is known for its Indo-European-Nawabi architectural style.
Kaiserbagh Palace, built by the last Nawab of Awadh, Wajid Ali Shah, is known to be one of the finest historical monuments in Lucknow. The biggest highlight of the palace is the Baradari, which is a white stone structure embellished with silver. The monument is known for its artistic and architectural brilliance and age-old charm.
Built as a replica of London’s Big Ben, Husainabad Clock Tower is said to be among the tallest clock towers in India. It was built in 1881 and is known for its Victorian and Gothic style. It is considered one of the most important historical places in Lucknow and is a must-visit for sure.
Constantania House is one of the most visited historical monuments in Lucknow. It was built using a blend of various architectural styles and influences. It is located on the campus of La Martiniere College and is a must-visit when in Lucknow.
Built by Nawab Asaf-Ud-Daula, this sixty feet tall gateway once marked as the entrance to Old Lucknow. They say that Rumi Darwaza was modelled after a gate in Constantinople. The Rumi Darwaza has now become the logo for Lucknow city. Its unique mughal architectural style has made it a powerful monument in Lucknow. 
Located in the heart of Lucknow, close to other monuments like the High Court, Tehri Kothi, and Shaheed Smarak, is The British Residency. It was built as a residence for the British Resident General, who was the representative in the court of Nawab. The structure is built in Palladian architectural style. There is also a museum in the vicinity which attracts many tourists.
Dilkusha Kothi was built in the 18th century in the English Baroque style of architecture and is one of the most popular historical places in Lucknow. Not much remains of the structure but a few towers and the external walls of the monument. The surrounding garden adds to the beauty and old-world charm of the monnument.   
One of the most popular Nawabs of Awadh, Saadat Ali Khan, and his wife Khurshid Zadi rest in peace in this tomb. The intricate architecture and the beautiful garden around the tomb attract many visitors to this historical site.
There are many other historical monuments in Lucknow waiting to be explored. The city is truly an architectural delight. If you’re an art and history buff, you need to plan a trip to Lucknow right away!
5 Exotic Locations to Visit Outside India in November
Mahindra Holidays & Resorts India Ltd. (MHRIL), a part of Leisure and Hospitality sector of the Mahindra Group, offers quality family holidays primarily through vacation ownership memberships and brings to the industry values such as reliability, trust and customer satisfaction. Started in 1996, the company's flagship brand ‘Club Mahindra’, today has over 250,000 members , who can holiday at 100+ resorts in India and abroad.
