Vegetarian Food Items To Eat in Lucknow
1. Prakash Kulfi
Prakash Kulfi has been serving Lucknow for many decades. Please don’t confuse it with regular Kulfi. 

The aroma and taste of Prakash Kulfi will mesmerize the food lover in you. The hint of green, yellow, and orange colors makes it an attractive food item as well. #SnapIt

There are many outlets, but the one that’s the oldest and you should visit is situated right inside the Aminabad market.

So when you come to Lucknow, don’t forget to try out Prakash’s Kulfi Falooda. Since it’s a cold food item, having it in the summers is soul-touching.

Timings: 11 am to 11 pm

2. Royal Cafe’s Basket Chaat
You must have eaten innumerable Chaat, but this Chaat is different. What makes it different is its serving style, which is unique in itself. 

Royal Cafe Basket Chaat - Lucknow Food Guide
The Chaat has chickpeas, spices, curd, and all kinds of chutneys, and you eat it in a basket-shaped container made from potato flakes. You can also see this version of Chaat as a new form of the usual Chaat.

You can get authentic Basket Chaat in Royal Cafe in Hazratganj, the heart of Lucknow.

Timings: 11 am to 11 pm

3. Sharma Tea
Tea is an integral part of Indians. And while tea may not seem intimidating to you, I assure you Sharma’s Tea will change that.

Famous for its unique taste all over the city, Sharma Ji Ki Chai lies in Lalbagh of Lucknow.

Served in a Kulhad with Bun Maska, it takes away the day’s tiredness and makes you feel refreshed. 

Sharma Tea - Lucknow Food Guide
This place looks like a regular tea shop, but you’d surprise to know that they have retained their taste for over 50 years. Lucknowites, who happen to be in this area, can’t stop themselves from drinking Sharma’s tea. 

Timings: 7 am to 8 pm

4. Netram Ajay Kumar Kachoris
You’ll see Netram Ajay Kumar as a simple sweet shop in Aminabad. The Kachori made by the outlet gained a lot of fame and became a must-eat in Lucknow. 

You get Kachoris made with pure Ghee (clarified butter) along with potato curry. Try getting a plate in chilly winters, and you’ll thank us later.

Netram Kachori - Lucknow Food Guide
Apart from the Kachori, the food platter is also not ordinary as well. It starts with just ₹80, which includes Puri, Sabzi, Boondi Raita, and pickle.

Timings: 7:30 am to 10 pm

5. Shukla Chaat
Another Chaat in the list!

While it may not be as unique as Royal Cafe Chaat, in serving style, Shukla Chaat sure does have a taste.

Situated in Hazratganj, Shukla Chaat has continuously welcomed the entire city with its delicious Chaat since 1968. 

Shukla Chaat House - Lucknow Food Guide
Their Aloo Tikkis and Matar Tikkis to Dahi Bade and Pani Puri – it all made people so crazy that it is challenging not to like them if you are a street-food junkie.

Timings: 3 pm to 10:30 pm

6. Nimish or Makkhan Malai
For more than 50 years, Nimish or Makkhan Malai has been one of the must-have food items. If you’re coming to Lucknow in Winters (November – February), you can’t miss this godsend food.

Makkhan Malai at Chowk - Lucknow Food Guide
Nimish is nothing but extracted cream from milk along with some ‘magic.’ It melts as soon as you put it in your mouth and leaves you craving for more.

Timings: 8 am to 9 pm in Winters only.

7. Ram Asrey’s Malai Gilori
Malai Gilori is yet another sweet that will steal your heart. You can get its authentic taste in Ram Asrey outlets – one is in Hazratganj, and another in the Chowk area of Lucknow.

Ram Asrey Malai Gilori - Lucknow Food Guide
Malai Gilori is sweet, which has a layer of cream on the top surface. Inside it is a mixture of dry fruits etc. Some people also call it Malai Paan because it is triangular like Paan.

Timings: 8 am to 10 pm
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Non-Vegetarian Food Items To Eat in Lucknow
8. Tunday Kababi
If you’re a non-veg and want to taste the best of Lucknow, then don’t miss Kebabs at Tunday Kababi in Aminabad.

Tunday Kababi is a name that does not need any introduction. For the last 115 years, they have gained fame not only in Lucknow but around the world. Many notable personalities such as actors, politicians, artists have been here multiple times.

Tunday Kababi started during the time of Nawabs, but the taste and heritage have remained intact to date. Once had a small shop in the Chowk area in 1905, Tunday Kababi has eight outlets in Lucknow. It is located at Chowk, Aminabad, Kapurthala, Alambagh, Kanpur Road, Telibagh, Rahimnagar and Saharaganj Mall. 

Tunday Kababi 1 - Lucknow Food Guide
Tunday Kababi 2 - Lucknow Food Guide
If you want to get the authentic taste, then do visit the Aminabad one. Nonetheless, their Kebabs will tinge all sensors on your tongue and will melt right away after you put it in your mouth.

Legend has it that they use a total of 160 types of spices in their kebabs, and their recipe remains a secret to date. Now you can imagine the aroma and taste of these Kebabs.

Timings: 11 am to 11 pm

9. Wahid Biryani
In India, three places are famous for serving delicious Biiryani: Hyderabad, Moradabad, and Lucknow.

As soon as the name of Lucknowi Biryani comes, the name of Wahid Biryani shines on top. The main reason for this is the aroma and taste of the Biryani prepared by them, which makes a different place in the eater’s mind.

Wahid Biryani, which started from a small shop in 1955, touches the heights of success and fame today. Apart from the stars of the big screen, many famous personalities have tasted their Biryani.

Wahid Biryani 1 - Lucknow Food Guide
Wahid Biryani 2 - Lucknow Food Guide
Wahid’s Biryani is not as spicy as Hyderabadi Biryani. You can think of it like Moradabadi Biryani which has mild spices, a great aroma, and lots of love. After all, food lovers know that Biryani is not just a dish but a feeling.

Do note that Wahid Biryani is famous for its Chicken Biryani. For Mutton Biryani, keep on scrolling.

Timings: 11 am to 11 pm

10. Idrees Biryani
Idrees Biryani has made a mark among the big names like Tunday Kababbi and Wahid Biryani. Their shop is in the Nakkhas area of ​​Lucknow and looks like a typical shop even today. But it goes far ahead when it comes to the taste of his Biryani.

You should try their Mutton Biryani. You can’t sway yourself by their delicious taste because when the Biryani is cooking, the aroma of saffron, kewda, rose water, rice, and spices keep you tied.

Idrees Biryani - Lucknow Food Guide
Two things which they can improve here are seating arrangements and hygiene. If you find yourself uncomfortable due to any of these reasons, ask them to pack Biryani and eat it at your place. In any case, don’t miss it!

Timings: 9 am to 8 pm

11. Raheem’s Kulcha Nihari
Like Tunday Kababi, Wahid, and Idrees are famous for Biryani, Raheems is famous for Nalla Nihari. You can find their joint near Akbari Gate in the Chowk area. 

In the evening, the crowd breaks down here. And you’ll never find the shop devoid of customers.

Raheems - Lucknow Food Guide
For about 120 years, their Nihari has gained popularity as well as preference in terms of taste. Nihari is a type of juicy meat that tastes better with Kulcha. The combination of both imparts lovely flavor.

Timings: 8:30 am to 10 pm

12. Lalla Biryani
If you want to taste yet another marvelous Lucknowi Biryani, visit Lalla Biryani. For the last 32 years, Lalla Biryani has been attracting people with its delicious flavors.

This dum-style Biryani made with traditional Basmati rice and spices will leave you licking fingers. Even though it may not be that popular, but the demand for their Biryani never goes down.

Lalla Biryani - Lucknow Food Guide
Timings: 4 pm to 9 pm

13. Dastarkhwan
If you are looking for a place to taste multiple Mughlai cuisines at one spot, then come to Dastarkhwan. This restaurant is for non-vegetarians only. Some dishes are Galavati Kebab, Mutton Rogan Josh, Biryani, Shami Kebab, Boti Kebab, Sheermal, and many more.

Lucknow Food Guide: 13+ Food Items You Shouldn't Miss 1
Image Credit: Restaurant Guru
You can go for dinner with the whole family as well as with your friends or loved ones. Although they have many outlets in Lucknow, the oldest is in Lalbagh.

Timings: 12:30 pm to 10:30 pm

More Eateries of Lucknow
14. Pandit Raja’s Thandai
Many Thandai shops are in the Chowk area, but the oldest and popular one is Pandit Raja’s Thandai. Among the many varieties of Thandai, the most sought after is the cannabis-based Thandai. Please take it in the correct quantity, or you might not feel sober for a long time.

Timings: 10 am to 9 pm

15. Azhar Bhai Ka Paan
If you are in Lucknow, the city of Nawabi glory, then the mention of paan is bound to happen. Situated near Akbari Gate in the Chowk area, Azhar Bhai Paan’s fans are from Bollywood, actors Saif Ali Khan to Abhishek Bachchan. 

This 80-year-old shop has a total of 52 types of Paan options — mouth-ulcers paan, waist-breaker paan, paan for digestion, paan for burning sensation in the chest, and many more.

Timings: 11 am to 10 pm

16. Pardeshi Pani Puri/Golgappa of Patrakarpuram
Street food enthusiasts can’t keep themselves away from Pani Puri like a tea lover can’t keep himself from tea. Very few people will probably know this place in Gomti Nagar, Lucknow. 

This unique Pani Puri/Golgappa shop features 56 types of Paan Puri — all invented by the shop owner. Some examples are Bahubali, Chocolate, Silver Work, Fire, and Paan Pani Puri/Golgappas.

17. Black Carrot Halwa and Kashmiri Tea
A few steps ahead of Raheems, you’ll find shops selling black carrot’s Halwa and Kashmiri tea. Available only in winters, these delicacies are worth a try, especially if you’re a sweet tooth.

Timings: Morning to evening in winter.

18. Rattilal’s Khasta
Khasta is a type of breakfast in Lucknow, and Rattilal’s name is well-known for it. His shop is in Aminabad, which has been continuously providing crispy Khasta to the people since 1937.

Timings: 9 am to 9 pm

19. Bajpai Kachori Bhandar
Bajpai Kachori Bhandar, located in Hazratganj, Lucknow, is another place that is quite popular among Kachori lovers.

Timings: 9 am to 6 pm

20. GPO’s Dahi Bade
Are you fond of eating Dahi Bade? Then come to GPO’s Surpal Singh shop near Hazratganj. For the last 20 years, he has made Dahi Bada with his own hands. Perhaps this could be the secret of their Dahi Bade’s tantalizing taste!

Things to Keep in Mind
Most of the Lucknow food items and places are in Chowk, Hazratganj, and Aminabad.
All these places are generally crowded, so take special care of your things.
All places mentioned above are easily accessible by cabs, autos, and rickshaws. Please avoid taking your car to Aminabad unless you’re an expert in driving.
Some of these places have outlets across the city, so make sure you visit the old and authentic outlets.
Before going to any place, check its opening hours because it might change without notification.