Babu Banarasi Das University (also known as BBD University)[1] is a private university having its Main Campus in Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, India, established by Akhilesh Das in 2010 and named after his father and former Chief Minister of Uttar Pradesh, Babu Banarasi Das. The university was incepted by an Act (No. 25 of 2010) of State Legislature of Uttar Pradesh as a State Private University and UGC vide its letter no 8-30/2010(CPP-I/PU) dated 17 February 2011 empowered it to award degrees under section 22 of the UGC Act, 1956.[citation needed].
Integral University is situated in Lucknow, a city known for its culture, etiquette, monuments and role in the freedom struggle. Lucknow is the capital city of the largest state of India, and has a population of about 4.6 million. Lucknow is the capital city of Uttar Pradesh and it has always been a mulcultural city. Integral University has a unique culture of inclusiveness, diversity, personal and intellectual integrity and value-based education.The curriculum has a strong focus on individual growth and the development of essential tools so that its students make a mark in the corporate world and the ﬁeld of technology. These are solidly supported by a highly qualiﬁed and trained team of accomplished faculty and robust academic infrastructure. It was established under the Act Number 9 of 2004 by the State Government. The University is duly approved by the University Grants Commission (UGC) under section 2(f) and 12B of the UGC Act, 1956, Medical Council of India, Pharmacy Council of India, Indian Nursing Council, Council of Architecture, Bar Council of India, Indian Association of Physiotherapists, National Council for Teacher Education, UP State Medical Faculty. The University maintains a decent and decorous atmosphere in the campus. The campus is highly disciplined and ragging-free, with all modern amenities for pursuit of higher education and sports. The campus provides state-off the-art hostel accommodation, with the capacity to host 2600 students in the hostels, and houses a 550-bedded hospital, as part of the Medical College, with state-of-the-art medical facilities and more than 200 doctors. Integral University is not only an academic institution but also a mission and a vision to make the country progressive and prosperous in all walks of life. 
