Chhappan Bhog: Chhappan Bhog is a unique festival celebrated at the famous temple of Lord Krishna, known as the "Chhappan Bhog Temple" located in Lucknow. It usually takes place in the month of August or September. Devotees offer 56 different types of dishes to the deity as part of the rituals, and later these dishes are distributed among the devotees as Prasad (holy food).

Food has always been a major part of all our celebrations, large and small. Of them, the Chappan Bhog has to be the heartiest, with as many as 56 dishes prepared for Lord Krishna, during Janmashtami and also for Govardhan puja post Diwali. Every year during this time, thousands of devotees throng Mathura, to offer 56 dishes to appease Krishna.

I recall enjoying the feast at some of my neighbours' homes when I was a kid. Back then, my food appreciation was limited to meal hopping at my friends' houses and exploring the street food of Lucknow. It was only much later that I started exploring the concepts beyond. And that's what led me to explore the story behind the Chappan Bhog.

Why does Chappan Bhog have 56 dishes?
Legend has it that Krishna held up the Govardhan mountain for a week to protect villagers and livestock from a torrential thunderstorm caused by the wrath of Lord Indra. As per the legend, Krishna held up the mountain for seven days straight, skipping his usual eight meals a day. Once the rains abated, the villagers offered their thanks by preparing the Annakuta or mountain of food. This was a combination of the eight meals of the day multiplied times seven and hence, fifty-six.

In the book The Eternal Food: Gastronomic ideas and Experiences of Hindus and Buddhists, author Paul M Toomey talks about food “both as the main commodity of the pilgrimage culture and as a communicator of social and religious messages”. I couldn't agree more with the philosophy.

What goes into a Chappan Bhog?
The typical offerings included in the Chappan Bhog comprise a variety of cereals, fruits and dry fruits, vegetable preparations, sweets, beverages, savouries and chutneys and pickles. However, the actual dishes of the Chapan Bhog vary across regions based on their culinary practices, spiritual connotations and ingredients available. Apart from the customary favourites of butter, yogurt, ghee and rice, there are others that range from sweet: mohan bhog (a semolina halwa), shakkarpara, ghewar, rabri and shrikhand to savoury: khichdi, puri, saag (cooked greens), as well as nuts, papad and chutneys. Of these, the dairy and sweet preparations are placed closest to the deity as they are believed to be dearer to Lord Krishna's palate.

But beyond the concept and legend behind the ritual, there is a larger philosophy at work. One that intrigues me more.

Our five fingers have five rasas: sweet, salty, sour, spicy and savoury. When we cook with our hands, these five rasas get transferred to the food. Looking at the larger picture of the Chappan Bhog, I'd like to think that this grand feast is a bigger manifestation of those rasas. After all, what better medium to convey and transfer feelings than food? In artistic or literary terms, rasa can be called the aesthetic flavour of any form of art that elicits the desired emotion in the mind of the reader or viewer. Likewise, food is a source of emotion too, it brings joy, it brings back memories, it opens up conversations. When food is prepared for and offered to the gods, it is believed to become even more sacred, having been ‘consumed' by the powers above. So, the 56 dishes being ‘accepted' by Krishna and then distributed among his devotees is symbolic of the rasas or relationship with him being established.

The contribution of temples towards nurturing local cuisine and preserving our food culture deserves a special mention here. For decades, temples in India have been using the same recipes and cooking techniques, which if not maintained by them, would've been lost a long time ago. For example, at Jagannath Temple in Puri—believed to have the largest kitchen in the world—the Mahaprasad is still cooked in earthen pots placed in a pyramid over wood fire. Here it is a daily ritual to offer no less than 56 dishes to the deity. The earthen pots retain both flavour and heat uniformly, making the food last for longer periods of time. The menu at the temple is unique in its own way:  there's the simple ukhuda (sugar-coated puffed rice), arisha (fried sweet cake made with rice flour), varieties of bhaja or fritters, a chilli laddoo called maric ladu, dalma (vegetables cooked with lentils), amalu (malpua) and many more.

At the Shri Swaminarayan temple in London, every year the Annakut is a grand display that stretches over seven tiers with more than a thousand dishes, stretching over 85 feet!

So this Krishna Janmashtami, let's seek an emotional completion through these 56 mediums, and celebrate the rasas of our oneness with God with the rasas in food.

A Lucknow-based sweetmeat shop has prepared the 56 ‘bhog’ thaali to be offered to the deity, says Acharya Satyendra Das, chief priest of Shri Ram Janmabhoomi
LUCKNOW A unique platter of 56 sweet delicacies - ‘Chhappan Bhog’ - has been sent from Lucknow to Ayodhya that will be offered to the deity as a first bhog immediately after the Pran Pratishtha ceremony of Ram Lalla on January 22 .

Srajal Gupta of Madhurima Sweets, Lucknow, who curated this unique thaali, said: “We made special ‘Tulsi bhog’ made of tulsi leaves, swarn kalash (sweets with unique gold coating), pistachio barfi, Mysore-pak, mewa bundi laddoo, cashewnut barfi, badam barfi, Kesar barfi, silver coated badam and ilaichi, makhana-pak, mewa panjiri, kaju roast katley, makkhan peda, kesaria misri, milk cake, kesariya gujiya, moti-pak, sohan halwa and many other delicacies.”

Gupta said he made this offering after speaking to Ram Temple’s chief priest Acharya Satyendra Das. “We handed over the special thaali to him. Acharya told me that the first prasad, which would be offered to Ram after Pran Pratishtha, would be given by him,” he said.



WEBSITES:

1. https://www.cntraveller.in/story/krishna-janmasthami-story-behind-legendary-chappan-bhog/
2. https://www.hindustantimes.com/cities/lucknow-news/the-sweet-side-of-consecration-fervour-chhappan-bhog-sent-to-ayodhya-for-deity-101705754505068.html
