Lucknow Dance and Music Festival: Organized by the Uttar Pradesh Tourism Department, the Lucknow Dance and Music Festival showcases classical dance forms like Kathak, Bharatanatyam, Odissi, and various musical performances. It aims to promote the traditional arts of India and is usually held in the month of February.

Music and dance in Lucknow has been much influenced by the Mughal rule India. The kings were known to lead a life of pleasure and their main source of entertainment was to indulge in music and dance. The royal courts had some of the best dancers and musicians of Lucknow. The performances in dance & music in Lucknow was something that was worth watching. Even today, various artists all over India keep Lucknow music and dance alive. The realm of fine arts flourished during the Mughal rule and Lucknow emerged as one of the best places to indulge in music and dance.
Lucknow is famous for its collection of classical music that is called as Hindustani classical music. The various ragas, compositions and beats were highly inspired by the poetry written by the famous poets and literary figures. Lucknow traditional music is highly evolved and every detail is taken into attention while singing so as to impart the right feel and the meaning.
The famous Lucknow Gharana was created in the royal courts of the Nawabs of Lucknow. This Gharana inspired major dance forms like Kathak, which is the classical dance of the north of India. Today, the rich tradition of music and dance of Lucknow is kept alive by various exponents and preachers through various concerts and cultural programmes.


The Mahindra Sanatkada Festival in Lucknow offers a variety of cultural events, including dastaangoi, music, dance, and theatre, as well as literary sessions, shopping, and food. The festival showcases the sweetness and uniqueness of the Lucknowi zubaan (language) and highlights the art and craft of the region. Visitors can also enjoy a wide range of food options from popular food joints. The festival will culminate with the Awadhi Home Cooked Food Festival. 

The ongoing Mahindra Sanatkada Festival has come up with a blend of cultural events during the five-day event that is underway at Safed Baradari, Kaiserbagh. From dastaangoi, music, dance to theatre there is a lot being offered to the visitors besides the literary sessions, shopping and food. We bring out the action from the opening day. Dastango Mehmood Abdi, a lawyer by profession, says that sweetness in Lucknowi zubaan is a beautiful amalgamation of Hindi and Urdu and Awadhi dialect. “Jo sweetness hai Lucknow ki zubaan mein wo Awadhi se ayi hai. The strength of our language is such that even in a crowd Lucknowites could be singled out when they speak,” says Abdi. He also talked about taqsali zubaan (as a coin minting unit was established in Chowk area) which diluted purity of language like nihari became nahari, taqt became thakat and so on. Lucknowite Askari Naqvi presented three ghazals of Meer Taqi Meer. He was well-supported by Naveen Mishra, Mohd Rafi, Tushar Sahai, Harshwardhan Singh Negi, Aditya Pratap Singh, Aaditya and Abhieraj Shahi. 

“Tried adding a new dimension to my strength of performance such as dastaangoi and sozkhwani. This is the first time I have performed with a band which plays mix of classical instruments like sitar, tabla and shehnai along with modern devices,” shares Askari. The play Taking Threads,held at the Baradari by Swatantra Talim, team turned out to be a well-curated act where live display of threads, weaving, sharp script, strong narration and smart acts were elegantly weaved together to showcase the life of artisans. The play was inspired by real-life stories of women artisans of chikan-kaarigari . 

“We have curated events that highlight art and craft in literal sense. Such meaningful presentations create awareness about our indigenous crafts,” says Sanatkada founder Madhvi Kuckreja. Besides, Neelakshi Rai captivated the audience with her kathak performance on songs like Chupke Chupke Raat Din and Hamari Atariya Pe. The attraction for visitors at the fest is not just the shopping and cultural arena. Options are available at the Baradari open area and at the Salempur House lawns. “We tried light options like chaat, piping hot pakori besides the home-cooked snacks at Naimatkhan stall. But the real action is at the lawns where kebabs and kulcha-nihari stalls are set up. The perfect ending was with Kashmiri chai with malai,” adds a visitor, Umesh Gupta. Popular food joints like Raheem’s, Tundey Kababi, Tiwari Chaat and Ah So Yum have been placed at the venue. From dimsums, bao, sushi, Rajasthani food, home-cooked khichda and Awadhi food, options are aplenty.The highlight of the Sunday afternoon will be the most awaited Awadhi Home Cooked Food Festival, that sees a big turnout of foodies.

A puzzle, a riddle, an emotion, a passion, a way of life for some, a waste of time for others. It has a thousand names and as many meanings. It inspires great works of art, moves mountains, demolishes kingdoms; it also manifests in sweet nothings, a stolen look, a dried flower in a forgotten book, that crumbles upon touch. It’s universal and personal, unbearable longing and indescribable ecstasy, vulnerable as a teardrop, defiant as a mountain top.

Love is definitely what has kept us going for 15 years to bring you this labour of love, this celebration of Lucknow and of handicrafts, this beautiful, chaotic, potpourri of experiences that is the Mahindra Sanatkada Lucknow Festival. And if you haven’t already guessed by now, the theme for this year’s exploration is Aashiqana Lucknow.

“na haarā hai ishq aur na duniyā thakī hai diyā jal rahā hai havā chal rahī hai”

Here’s to walking through a city that is aashiqana not only in its people and places but also in its stories, memories, food, art, language and cityscapes. Why aashiqui, though? Some say aashiqui is synonymous with peace, and some say junoon. But the beauty of aashiqui lies in how there are multiple layers of emotions leading to diverse interpretations and manifestations of it. Aashiqui is not right, not wrong, it just is.

Come celebrate aashiqui with us. And while we’re at it, let's experience Ishq-e-Majazi, Ishq-e-Haqiqi and all things in between, walking the tight ropes of humanity and the social fabric that it exists in, all against the backdrop of a very Aashiqana Lucknow.

The much-awaited MSLF is back in its 15th edition and yes it has all the usual sights, sounds

and experiences that you have come to love over the years. The festival will host a series of performances, discussions, installations and a well-researched, experiential exhibition on the theme, apart from the usual food, crafts bazaar, qissagoi and baitbaazi sessions that you have come to love and expect over the years.

The Weaves and Crafts Bazaar showcases handcrafted products from over 100 artisans from all over the country under the majestic Safed Baradari. The heritage walks and tours explore the various popular and sometimes unknown facets of this beautiful city which include the homes of lucknow, the qasbas, heritage sites, food walk, with many more interesting and anecdotal qisse weaved with facts and history. The Literary Guftgu is a series of theme based talks and discussions that serve to highlight the living heritage and culture of the city. The food stalls showcase the best culinary traditions of Lucknow and the Awadhi Home Cooked Food Festival aka Sunday Food Festival is something that entices visitors in droves every year. Not to be left behind, the scintillating live performances, including the much-awaited Dawn Concert every year, bring in art lovers and aficionados from all walks of life, to share an experience as a community. With workshops, discussions, films, theatre, music, poetry, food, shopping, walks, book releases, exhibitions – This 5-day community mela has grown into an experience that draws in visitors by the thousands every year, both from within the city and from all over the country.

Dedicated to the memory of Late Indira Mahindra who continues to inspire the core values of the festival, the Mahindra Sanatkada Lucknow Festival is built upon the very principles that Indira Mahindra lived by – To bring together people from all walks of life and celebrate the rich culture of our country.

ik lafz-e-mohabbat kā adnā ye fasānā hai
simTe to dil-e-āshiq phaile to zamāna hai

The 15th edition will feature an exemplary line-up of artists and performers, with Voctronica, the country's first ever all-vocal orchestra, Banat and Tamara, artists who perform folk music fusion of western and eastern culture, Parmesh Shahni, Naman Ahuja, Mala Sinha, Prahlad Singh Tippaniya, Kavya Saxena on a series of theme based talks and discussions at our Literary Guftgu. These are just a few names. The city will be grooving to the tunes of Ishq for all the 5 days of the festival.

We invite you to come fall in love again with the city and taste the inimitable flavours of Aashiqana Lucknow.

2 - 6 February, 2024
Safed Baradari & Salempur House, Qaiser Bagh

Launched in 2010, the Mahindra Sanatkada Lucknow Festival is an annual event centred around a handicrafts exhibition and sale showcasing products made by artisans from across the country. The festival, which spans five days in the first week of February, also features talks, workshops, walking tours, book launches, exhibitions, film screenings and cultural performances.

Each year, the festival organised by the Sanatkada Trust, has a different theme that explores a specific aspect of Lucknow and defines its visual aesthetics and performances. These have included ‘Feminists of Awadh’ (2014), which spotlighted female icons from Lucknow; ‘Lucknow ki Rachi Bass Tehzeeb’ (2016), which celebrated the different communities that have enriched the city; and ‘Lucknowi Bawarchikhane’ (2022), which documented the different dishes of the region. This year, the theme of the festival is Raqs-o-Mausiqi meaning ‘time of music, pleasure and comfort’.

The speakers and performers of the previous editions of the Mahindra Sanatkada Lucknow Festival were mythologist Devdutt Pattanaik, scholar Rosie Llewellyn-Jones, singers Shubha Mudgal and Tajdar Junaid and the bands Alif and Indian Ocean.

The 14th edition of the festival is scheduled to take place in February 2023. This year, artists and performers at Mahindra Sanatkada Festival include Avahan-The Band, Kathak performance by Shinjini Kulkarni, a lecture on ‘Music Archiving’ by archivist Irfan Zuberi, tabla performance by Pandit Anindo Chatterjee and a conversation on ‘Influence of Awadhi Awadhi-Lucknowi influence on Indian Cinema—films, music and songs’ with Muzaffar Ali and Atul Tiwari. Other attractions at the Mahindra Sanatkada Lucknow festival include the Weaves and Crafts Bazaar, Heritage Walks, Literary Guftgu, food stalls showcasing the culinary traditions of the city, workshops, discussions, films, theatre and much more. With such a wide range of art offerings, this festival celebrates both the culturally-rich Awadh region, as well as the entire country.




Website : 

https://mslf.in/
https://www.festivalsfromindia.com/festival/mahindra-sanatkada-lucknow-festival-2/
