Lucknow, fondly called the City of Nawabs, is a melting pot of cultures. This is evident in the numerous festivals that are celebrated throughout the year with great pomp and fervour. It is a spiritual place celebrating great festivals with pomp and fervor. The main festivals celebrated in Lucknow are Christmas, Diwali, Eid, Holi, Vrinadavan Sharadotsav, Lucknow Festival, etc. Music of Lucknow is really superb having great influence of ancient traditions. Lucknow is world-wide famous for its classical and folk music as well as dance. The city comes alive with colorful processions, music, and dance during these festivals, creating a sense of unity and joy among its residents. The Fascinating city of Lucknow has ever been associated with a rich tradition of hospitality, exotic cuisine and architectural grandeur. Lucknow attained unparalleled heights of excellence in art, craft and culture during the period of Nawabs. The grandeur and opulence of Lucknow's history have transcended the boundaries of time. This is best visible in the Awadh city's incredible monuments, most of which still echo the whispers of those who dwelled there in the past. Lucknow's rich culture, vibrant arts, crafts and culinary breakthroughs have also been passed down from one generation to another and now, people from across the world come to savour the delights of Awadh. Lucknow's past has been shaped and moulded by its many-faceted forms of art and craft and that's exactly what the Lucknow Mahotsav celebrates- centuries of this Nawabi culture.

Here's a glimpse into some of the most prominent cultural festivals and events that Lucknow has to offer:

1. Lucknow Mahotsav: 
(A gala of Nawabi arts, crafts, culture, cuisines & more, Lucknow Mahotsav ties the past with present). Nothing comes as close to telling what Lucknow has been and is all about, as the Lucknow Mahotsav.
 
Lucknow Mahotsav is a 10-day long cultural extravaganza held annually in the month of November or December. It showcases the rich cultural heritage of Lucknow through various performances including classical music and dance, ghazals, qawwalis, and traditional folk performances. The festival also features exhibitions, food stalls, and craft displays. Lucknow Mahotsav is organized every year to showcase Uttar Pradesh Art and Culture and in particular Lucknavi 'Tehzeeb' so as to promote Tourism. One of the objectives of the cultural bonanza is to provide encouragement to the Artisans. Craftsmen from all over the country bring their masterpieces to the festival to the delight of shoppers. Colorful processions, traditional dramas, Kathak dances in the style of Lucknow Gharana, Sarangi and sitar recitals, ghazals, qawalis and thumri produce a cheerful atmosphere during the ten-day-long festival. Exciting events like ekka races, kite flying, cockfighting and other customary village games re-establish an ambience of the bygone Nawabi days.

LUCKNOW MAHOTSAV TELLS THE TALE OF LUCKNOW'S VIBRANT PAST:
Nothing comes as close to telling what Lucknow has been and is all about, as the Lucknow Mahotsav. A kaleidoscope of craft, couture, culture and cuisine, the 10-day mega fair is a cornucopia of colours and cheers in all forms. It literally transports the visitor to the old world charm of the City of Nawabs, as much as to its modern-day delights. Let us, as proud Lucknowites, take you on a trip down memory lane to trace the origin, past, present and possibly the future of this pageant.
It is instructive to recall, that the year 1975 was observed as the Tourism Year and since then, every year, Lucknow Mahotsav has been organized. Even back then, the carnival held a charm and a vibe that was unmatched by others.
Since its humble beginnings, it has become one of the grandest events, not only for Lucknowites welcoming the winters but for thousands of people across the country, many, who use this opportunity to showcase their craft. For us Lucknowites, the Mahotsav marks 10 (or so) days of riveting fun, excitement, a time to reflect on the past and everything that Lucknow is today.


BRINGING HINTS OF NOSTALGIA AMID LAKHNAWIS:
Just the words "Lucknow Mahotsav'' evoke nostalgia and fond remembrance in die-hard Lakhnawis. Mahotsav evenings are remembered by many as gatherings of people from all walks of life, who come to take in the arts of Lucknow, to enjoy the rich Awadhi cuisine, which is symbolic of Lucknow and to catch a fleeting essence of the nawabi culture in the form of Kavi Sammelans, Mushairas and the likes.
In the recent past, Lucknow Mahotsav's festivities have been taken to the next level as national performers and artists have come here to elevate and illuminate Lucknow's forgotten arts and more. These artists come here not only to rekindle the flame of these forgotten arts but to achieve and obtain new heights, to find new meaning within them.


MAHOTSAV BRINGS FORTH FORGOTTEN AWADHI ARTS:
Artisans who are skilled at the centuries-old Zardari, Chikankari and associated works come here to show their wares. Chikankari is one of Lucknow's most lucrative arts and for good reason. It requires skill, precision and years of training, and the artisans of Lucknow have got it down to a T. Textile art is part of a traditional lifestyle and subtly blends with new-age fashion. When at the Mahotsav, you have to indulge in the simple yet elegant work of chikan artists.
And then there's the delectable Lucknowi cuisine. Since Lucknow Mahotsav is a celebration of the city's past, there's no way anyone can miss out on the food. Exotic foods and rich cuisines have always been a part of Lucknow's culture, and the Mahotsav delivers. Here, you can get everything from Tunday ke Kebab to Wahid ki Biryani and then some more. Lucknow is nothing short of a foodie's paradise and in the many years of the Mahotsav, we've learned that we, Lucknow locals, are suckers for our own food.
Over the years, Lucknow Mahotsav has expanded its wings to make way for artists, craftsmen and artisans from areas in Uttar Pradesh and the country but the essence of Lucknow, and its charm is not forgotten for a moment. This is perhaps best quantified in the hordes of Lucknowites who come for the Mahotsav from all parts of the city.


MAHOTSAV HOLDS A SPECIAL PLACE FOR LUCKNOWITES:
It simply goes to show that Lucknowites are curious about their own city and are always looking to find something new around a corner in Lucknow. The Lucknow Mahotsav brings together the galis of Chowk, the swank localities of Gomti Nagar and everything in between. A city within a city, the Mahotsav has been beckoning us since we were children and has not only shaped what the city is today but also the people. The Mahotsav is a place of discovery and serendipity, a place where time stands still and the past is celebrated, making way for the future to come. At the conclusion of each Mahotsav, Lucknowites walk tall and proud, even as they await with eager anticipation for the next version.
 
HISTORY: 
The year 1975-76 was observed and organized in South Asia as The Tourism Year. On this occasion in the motive to promote Lucknow's Art, Culture and Tourism for national and international tourists, the decision to organize the Lucknow Festival was taken. During this period with exception to a few years, Lucknow Mahotsav has been organized every year. Lucknow Mahotsav evening would be adorned with on one hand by the celebrities, famous artists' performances and on the other by renounced classical singers. In this program the upcoming local artists have been provided a special representation on the cultural evenings. In addition, the national as well as local Poets/ Shayars have been provided due representation through Kavi Sammelan and Mushayara.

CUISINES:
Mahotsav is a delight for the connoisseurs of good food as it is the ideal place to pamper the taste buds of the visitors with endless varieties of scrumptious dishes as a wide range of cuisines are available at the festival, including Kesaria Doodh, Kabab-parathas and other mouth-watering non-vegetarian exotic dishes.

ENTERTAINMENT:
The 10 days long festival is one such example. The festival invites many musical as well as comical artists for completing your day in its full sense. The festival celebrated between 25 November and 5 December in Lucknow, the capital of Uttar Pradesh, is a cultural extravaganza. During these 10 days, the entire arena is filled with people enjoying various rides and other poetry/cultural events.


Address: 
Kanshiram Smriti Upwan, Jalvayu Vihar, Ashiyana, Jalvayu Vihar, Lucknow - 226001

Business Information:
Lucknow Mahotsav Sthal in Jalvayu Vihar, Lucknow Lucknow Mahotsav Sthal in Lucknow is one of the leading businesses in the Fair Grounds. Also known for Banquet Halls, Auditoriums, Conference Halls, Event Venues, Exhibition Halls, Fair Grounds and much more. Find Address, Contact Number, Reviews & Ratings, Photos, Maps of Lucknow Mahotsav Sthal, Lucknow.

Location and Overview:
Lucknow Mahotsav Sthal in Jalvayu Vihar, Lucknow is a top player in the category Fair Grounds in the Lucknow. This well-known establishment acts as a one-stop destination servicing customers both local and from other parts of Lucknow. Over the course of its journey, this business has established a firm foothold in it's industry. The belief that customer satisfaction is as important as their products and services, have helped this establishment garner a vast base of customers, which continues to grow by the day. This business employs individuals that are dedicated towards their respective roles and put in a lot of effort to achieve the common vision and larger goals of the company. In the near future, this business aims to expand its line of products and services and cater to a larger client base. In Lucknow, this establishment occupies a prominent location in Jalvayu Vihar. It is an effortless task in commuting to this establishment as there are various modes of transport readily available. It is known to provide top service in the following categories: Banquet Halls, Auditoriums, Conference Halls, Event Venues, Exhibition Halls, Fair Grounds.

Products and Services offered:
Lucknow Mahotsav Sthal in Jalvayu Vihar has a wide range of products and / or services to cater to the varied requirements of their customers. The staff at this establishment are courteous and prompt at providing any assistance. They readily answer any queries or questions that you may have. This establishment is functional from 06:00 - 01:00.
Please scroll to the top for the address and contact details of Lucknow Mahotsav Sthal at Jalvayu Vihar, Lucknow.

What users liked:👍
1. Many customers mentioned that the place is large and has ample space for parking.
2. Some reviews appreciated the cultural diversity showcased in the Lucknow Mahotsav, with stalls from different states of India.
3. Some customers enjoyed the live music played at the event.
4. Some reviews praised the greenery and cleanliness of the park where some events were held.

What can be improved:😊
1. Few reviews mentioned that there were issues with entry tickets and security arrangements.
2. Some customers complained about high prices of items sold by vendors in comparison to market prices.
3. A few reviews criticized uneven surfaces, overgrown grass, dust, and parking issues.

Services offered:♿
-> Wheel Chair Accessible Entrance And Exit.
-> Wheel Chair Accessible In Car Parking.








2. Chhappan Bhog: Chhappan Bhog is a unique festival celebrated at the famous temple of Lord Krishna, known as the "Chhappan Bhog Temple" located in Lucknow. It usually takes place in the month of August or September. Devotees offer 56 different types of dishes to the deity as part of the rituals, and later these dishes are distributed among the devotees as Prasad (holy food).

Food has always been a major part of all our celebrations, large and small. Of them, the Chappan Bhog has to be the heartiest, with as many as 56 dishes prepared for Lord Krishna, during Janmashtami and also for Govardhan puja post Diwali. Every year during this time, thousands of devotees throng Mathura, to offer 56 dishes to appease Krishna.

I recall enjoying the feast at some of my neighbours' homes when I was a kid. Back then, my food appreciation was limited to meal hopping at my friends' houses and exploring the street food of Lucknow. It was only much later that I started exploring the concepts beyond. And that's what led me to explore the story behind the Chappan Bhog.

Why does Chappan Bhog have 56 dishes?
Legend has it that Krishna held up the Govardhan mountain for a week to protect villagers and livestock from a torrential thunderstorm caused by the wrath of Lord Indra. As per the legend, Krishna held up the mountain for seven days straight, skipping his usual eight meals a day. Once the rains abated, the villagers offered their thanks by preparing the Annakuta or mountain of food. This was a combination of the eight meals of the day multiplied times seven and hence, fifty-six.

In the book The Eternal Food: Gastronomic ideas and Experiences of Hindus and Buddhists, author Paul M Toomey talks about food “both as the main commodity of the pilgrimage culture and as a communicator of social and religious messages”. I couldn't agree more with the philosophy.

What goes into a Chappan Bhog?
The typical offerings included in the Chappan Bhog comprise a variety of cereals, fruits and dry fruits, vegetable preparations, sweets, beverages, savouries and chutneys and pickles. However, the actual dishes of the Chapan Bhog vary across regions based on their culinary practices, spiritual connotations and ingredients available. Apart from the customary favourites of butter, yogurt, ghee and rice, there are others that range from sweet: mohan bhog (a semolina halwa), shakkarpara, ghewar, rabri and shrikhand to savoury: khichdi, puri, saag (cooked greens), as well as nuts, papad and chutneys. Of these, the dairy and sweet preparations are placed closest to the deity as they are believed to be dearer to Lord Krishna's palate.

But beyond the concept and legend behind the ritual, there is a larger philosophy at work. One that intrigues me more.

Our five fingers have five rasas: sweet, salty, sour, spicy and savoury. When we cook with our hands, these five rasas get transferred to the food. Looking at the larger picture of the Chappan Bhog, I'd like to think that this grand feast is a bigger manifestation of those rasas. After all, what better medium to convey and transfer feelings than food? In artistic or literary terms, rasa can be called the aesthetic flavour of any form of art that elicits the desired emotion in the mind of the reader or viewer. Likewise, food is a source of emotion too, it brings joy, it brings back memories, it opens up conversations. When food is prepared for and offered to the gods, it is believed to become even more sacred, having been ‘consumed' by the powers above. So, the 56 dishes being ‘accepted' by Krishna and then distributed among his devotees is symbolic of the rasas or relationship with him being established.

The contribution of temples towards nurturing local cuisine and preserving our food culture deserves a special mention here. For decades, temples in India have been using the same recipes and cooking techniques, which if not maintained by them, would've been lost a long time ago. For example, at Jagannath Temple in Puri—believed to have the largest kitchen in the world—the Mahaprasad is still cooked in earthen pots placed in a pyramid over wood fire. Here it is a daily ritual to offer no less than 56 dishes to the deity. The earthen pots retain both flavour and heat uniformly, making the food last for longer periods of time. The menu at the temple is unique in its own way:  there's the simple ukhuda (sugar-coated puffed rice), arisha (fried sweet cake made with rice flour), varieties of bhaja or fritters, a chilli laddoo called maric ladu, dalma (vegetables cooked with lentils), amalu (malpua) and many more.

At the Shri Swaminarayan temple in London, every year the Annakut is a grand display that stretches over seven tiers with more than a thousand dishes, stretching over 85 feet!

So this Krishna Janmashtami, let's seek an emotional completion through these 56 mediums, and celebrate the rasas of our oneness with God with the rasas in food.

A Lucknow-based sweetmeat shop has prepared the 56 ‘bhog’ thaali to be offered to the deity, says Acharya Satyendra Das, chief priest of Shri Ram Janmabhoomi
LUCKNOW A unique platter of 56 sweet delicacies - ‘Chhappan Bhog’ - has been sent from Lucknow to Ayodhya that will be offered to the deity as a first bhog immediately after the Pran Pratishtha ceremony of Ram Lalla on January 22 .

Srajal Gupta of Madhurima Sweets, Lucknow, who curated this unique thaali, said: “We made special ‘Tulsi bhog’ made of tulsi leaves, swarn kalash (sweets with unique gold coating), pistachio barfi, Mysore-pak, mewa bundi laddoo, cashewnut barfi, badam barfi, Kesar barfi, silver coated badam and ilaichi, makhana-pak, mewa panjiri, kaju roast katley, makkhan peda, kesaria misri, milk cake, kesariya gujiya, moti-pak, sohan halwa and many other delicacies.”

Gupta said he made this offering after speaking to Ram Temple’s chief priest Acharya Satyendra Das. “We handed over the special thaali to him. Acharya told me that the first prasad, which would be offered to Ram after Pran Pratishtha, would be given by him,” he said.








3. Lucknow Literature Festival: Lucknow Literature Festival celebrates the rich literary heritage of the city. It provides a platform for authors, poets, and literary enthusiasts to come together and engage in discussions, book readings, and performances. The festival typically takes place in January or February.

Lucknow Literary Festival
 

“AAJ BHI KEHTA HAI HAR SAHIB-E NAZAR ROSHAN KHAYAAL,
LUCKNOW ILM-O ADAB MEIN AAP HI APNI MISAAL”
 

The first ever Lucknow Literary Festival is an endeavour of the LUCKNOW Society, which is a non profit organisation dedicated to the cause of promoting & conserving the Culture, Tehzeeb & Heritage of Shaher-e Lucknow. Shamim A. Aarzoo, the founder of the society is instrumental in organising the festival !

The Lucknow Literary Festival is an international literary festival held annually in Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, India since 2013.

The Lucknow Literary Festival is an endeavour of the Lucknow Society, which is a non profit organization dedicated to the cause of promoting & conserving the culture, tehzeeb & heritage of Lucknow. The Lucknow Literary Festival is an initiative that acknowledges new literary talents, honors our legends, while restoring literary tradition of the past, Lucknow’s own unique heritage and also evoking the newer generation’s interest. The event is also replete with entertainment for the literary taste. While, on one hand, the Lucknow Literary Festival has become a hub of the glitz from all across the country, it also dawns the light upon Lucknow's own talent and gives them a stage to showcase themselves in our cultural programs.

It is a 3-day event that celebrates creativity in all its forms. It is held each year in Lucknow, during the month of February/March, and celebrates excellence in Indian and International writing.

As one among the top 6 literary festival in India, as stated by Outlook magazine, It brings together some of the greatest thinkers and writers from across the world. From Nobel laureates to local language writers, Padma Shri holders to debut novelists, every February the most remarkable, witty, sensitive and brilliant collection of authors come together for three days of readings, debates and discussions at one platform. Its programme includes conversations with authors, readings, panel discussions, workshops, book launches, cultural programmes, events for college students and school children. Lucknow Literary Festival plays host to nearly 100 writers from across India, and other countries writing in various Indian languages and English every year. The Lucknow Literary Festival has been adorned with sundry of well - known names and faces that not only grace the event with their presence but also share their experiences, their insights with young and old alike.

The Lucknow Literary Festival too confers "Pride of Lucknow" award and "Wajid Ali Shah" award, which are given to people who have been contributing extraordinarily in different spheres of life. These people may belong to various fields like Hindi writing, Urdu writing, Journalism, Social service etc. These eminent personalities belong to Lucknow and even across India respectively.

Uttar Pradesh, is the land of Amir Khusru, Meer Taqi Meer, Asad Ullah Khan Ghalib, Mir Anees, Mirza Hadi Ruswa, Abdul Halim Sharar, Munshi Premchand, Yashpal, Amrit Lal Nagar, Raghupati Sahai Firaq Gorakhpuri, Asrar-ul-Haq Majaz, Pandit Brij Narain Chakbast, Jigar Moradabadi, Qurratulain Haider  and many others who gave us masterpieces and made epic contributions to Literature. Even today contemporary authors like Javed Akhtar, K P Saxena, Veena Talwar Oldenburg, Neelesh Misra, Prasoon Joshi, etc  have kept the flame of the written word burning bright. Despite the presence of such literary greats, Uttar Pradesh has not had a literary summit for a long time, even though we had a tradition of Kavi Sammelans, Mushairas & Nashists. To carry on this legacy, and consciously try to enlighten the reader, Lucknow Literary Festival is being started at the capital of Uttar Pradesh to promote the literary genius of Uttar Pradesh & Lucknow in particular ! The festival is an effort to bring forth the lutf of languages – Hindi, Urdu, Awadhi & English on a common platform.

Special award ‘Pride of Lucknow’ has also been initiated and presented to 7 legends : Padma Shri Bekal Utsahi – Outstanding Contribution in Awadhi Language; Malikzada Manzoor Ahmed – Outstanding Contribution in Urdu Language; Gopal Das Neeraj – Outstanding Contribution in Hindi Language; Vinod Mehta – Outstanding Contribution in English Language; Padma Shri Runa Banerjee – Outstanding Contribution in Women Empowerment; Jayant Krishna – Outstanding Contribution in Corporate Sector & Heritage Rejuvenation; Padma Shri Raj Bisaria – Outstanding Contribution in Art & Culture !

The Literary festival once again invoke the creative spirit of the city and bring together the scholars from all over the country. The festival witnessed a  diverse spectrum of novelists, playwrights, poets, screenwriters, journalists, lyricists and bloggers which usher in the revival of the city’s literary culture in 2 day festival at 3 auditoriums. Books were launched, contemporary and historical issues were discussed and debated threadbare. Through reading sessions the average reader re-discovered the joys of the books. Inaugurated traditionally with Vandana / Bharat Natyam Performance by Hiroko Fujiwara from Japan. The following books were launched : A Leaf Turns Yellow by Muzaffar Ali; In Good Faith by Saba Naqvi; Toke by Jugal Mody; The Virtuals by Anupam Sinha; Yaad Shaher by Neelesh Misra; Skand Spand by Skand Shukla; Hala Hala Nip by Appu Pen; Mayan by A P Maheshwari; The Sanjay Story by Vinod Mehta; The Oath of Vayuputras by Amish Tripathi; Aakhri Parwaaz by Aadil Rasheed Tilhari. Contemporary discussions were on Women Empowerment – Right to Expression; Social Network – The New Age Mantra; Samkaleen Hindi Kavita – Lokpriyata Ki Chunauti; Urdu Shayri Mein Lucknow Ka Maqaam; Zip Zap Zoom – The Future Comic Universe; Avadhi – Kal Aaj Aur Kal; Regulation on Media; Decoding Young Minds; Gadgets – Technology Upgrade; Wajid Ali Shah; A Century In Indian Cinema. Special Workshops were also conducted for the benefit of the audience like, Script Factory – How to write a movie script by Atul Tiwari; Aati Hai Urdu Zabaan Aate Aate to learn Urdu language through special software by TCS; History of Dastangoi by Ankit Chadha. ‘Tribute to the Urdu Poets of Lucknow’ & a paper on ‘Faiz Ahmed Faiz Ka Lucknow’ were another attractions of the festival.

There was also an entertainment quotient to the festival which highlighted through the cultural events like Dastangoi on Kabir, Sufi Qawwali, Mushaira, Performance of Neelesh Misra & Live Concert by Faridkot band. Award winning documentary ‘Nishaan-e Lucknow’ which highlighted the symbol of Fish in Awadh was also screened. The event further boost the magnetic pull of the city’s rich architectural heritage through photo exhibition of rare & new photographs of Lakhnau. Calligraphy, Vintage Car Exhibition, Chikan & Handicrafts on display were also added to the flavour of the festival. The world renowned zaiqa of Awadh was also the quintessential ingredient in the culture cauldron of the city. ‘Lucknow’s Got Talent’ was the another attraction for the Youth ! Naseeruddin Shah, Padma Shri Bekal Utsahi, Padma Shri Gulzar Dehlvi, Amaresh Mishra, Dolly Thakore, Veena Talwar Oldenburg, Roshan Taqui, Raja Mehmoodabad, Asif Mirza (direct descendant of Nawab Wajid Ali Shah from Kolkata), Padma Shri Runa Banerjee, Padma Shri Raj Bisaria, Padma Shri O P Agarwal, Waseem Bareilvi, Munawwar Rana, Malikzada Manzoor Ahmed, Anwar Jalalpuri, Sharib Rudaulvi, Pankaj Srivastava, Brijesh Pandey, Anirudh Singh, Amrendra Tripathi, Prof Roop Rekha Verma, were some of the other participants of the festival. It was an opportunity to bring in the traveller as well as the ‘literary tourist’ to Lucknow. As an annual event, we hope to see it grow into a melting pot of idea’s and cultures where litterateurs come share and enjoy in the city of Ada, Andaaz and Adab.

 

“EK LUTF-E KHAAS DIL KO TERI AARZOO ME HAI,
ALLAH JAANE KITNI KASHISH LUCKNOW ME HAI”


About LLF:

“AAJ BHI KEHTA HAI HAR SAHIB-E NAZAR ROSHAN KHAYAAL,
LUCKNOW ILM-O ADAB MEIN AAP HI APNI MISAAL”

Uttar Pradesh, is the land of Amir Khusru, Meer Taqi Meer, Asad Ullah Khan Ghalib, Mir Anees, Mirza Hadi Ruswa, Abdul Halim Sharar, Munshi Premchand, Yashpal, Amrit Lal Nagar, Raghupati Sahai Firaq Gorakhpuri, Asrar-ul-Haq Majaz, Pandit Brij Narain Chakbast, Jigar Moradabadi, Qurratulain Haider and many others who gave us masterpieces and made epic contributions to Literature. Even today contemporary authors like Javed Akhtar, Veena Talwar Oldenburg, Neelesh Misra, Prasoon Joshi, etc have kept the flame of the written word burning bright. Despite the presence of such literary greats, Uttar Pradesh has not had a literary summit for a long time, even though we had a tradition of Kavi Sammelans, Mushairas & Nashists. To carry on this legacy, and consciously try to enlighten the reader, Lucknow Literary Festival is organized in the capital of Uttar Pradesh to promote the literary genius of Uttar Pradesh & Lucknow in particular. The festival is an effort to bring forth the lutf of languages – Hindi, Urdu, Awadhi & English on a common platform.

The first ever Lucknow Literary Festival (लखनऊ साहित्य महोत्सव) is an endeavour of the LUCKNOW Society, which is a non profit organisation dedicated to the cause of promoting & conserving the Culture, Tehzeeb & Heritage of Shahar-e Lucknow. Shamim A. Aarzoo, the founder of the society is instrumental in organizing the festival. Lucknow Literary Festival acknowledges new literary talents, honors our legends, while restoring literary tradition of the past, Lucknow’s own unique heritage and also evoking the newer generation’s interest. The event is also replete with entertainment for the literary taste. Lucknow Literary Festival is, by far, India’s only literary festival organized solely on the independent efforts and endeavors of a youth organization with an average team age of 24 years.

The Lucknow Literary Festival has been adorned with sundry of well – known names and faces that not only grace the event with their presence but also share their experiences, their insights with young and old alike.

While, on one hand, the Lucknow Literary Festival has become a hub of the glitz from all across the country, it also dawns the light upon Lucknow’s own talent and gives them a stage to showcase themselves in our cultural programs.

“EK LUTF-E KHAAS DIL KO TERI AARZOO ME HAI,
ALLAH JAANE KITNI KASHISH LUCKNOW ME HAI”



PRIDE OF LUCKNOW AWARD:

Besides Wajid Ali Shah award, the Pride of Lucknow awards were conferred on three distinguished luminaries.

The Pride of Lucknow award for the contribution to Hindi literature was bestowed on author Shiv Murti. Born on March 11, 1950, Shiv Murti is one of the leading voices in contemporary Hindi fiction. Hailing from humble background, his life was full of struggle. But the best steel is made when iron is passed in hottest temperature. This holds true for author Shiv Murti. A person of few words, he let his works do the talking for him. His first story ‘Mujhe Jeena Hai’ followed by ‘Paanphool’ was published when he was studying in 12th standard. Thereafter he never looked back. His works depict the plight of rural folk in true light. Caste politics, power politics, poverty and Dalit problems form the theme of his works. One of his best novels ‘Triyacharitra’ portrays the life of a young girl who is false implicated for having an illicit relationship and as a consequence has to bear the brutal punishment handed out by gram panchayat. This novel was later made into a movie by Basu Chatterjee. Since his works paint a picture of rural life in true fervor, his fans consider him as second Premchand. But he brushes aside this compliment saying: “Premchand is Premchand. I can never replace him.” His other novels are Trishul and Tarpan. Keshar Kasturi is a collection of stories authored by him. Now his fans should gear up for the re- release of his novel ‘Akhiri Chhalang’. Shivmurti has won Kathakram and Hans award in the past. Though he is satisfied with the kind of Hindi works produced today, he expresses concern at the youngsters losing interest in Hindi literature.

The Pride of Lucknow award for excellence in women empowerment was bestowed on Madhvi Kuckreja, a social worker and founder of NGO Vanaangan. Humbled to receive the award, she considers herself fortunate to have won it though she had shifted her base to Lucknow only few years back. She has set up a shop, Sanatkada here that sells handicrafts, functions as a café, a book club and a film club, all rolled into one. Madhvi has supported numerous women-led, grassroots-level organizations to emerge as transparent, vibrant entities that are sensitive to women. Internationally, she has worked on building opinion against women being subjected to violence in Tajikistan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Sri Lanka and Sudan. Before moving to Lucknow, she was earlier working in Bundelkhand for alleviating the problems of Dalit women, who are entangled in triad of poverty, caste discrimination and gender subjugation. Though they have been financially independent for long, Dalit women are subjected to discrimination and violence in all forms manifesting itself through rape, public humiliation, or honor killings. Another common punishment for breaking community rules that is also used simply for vengeance is public stripping and parading of women. Violence can also take an extreme form with lynching of women labeled as witches or dayans. Domestic violence however, cuts through religious, caste and class boundaries-dowry related death caused by “accidental” burning of women thrives in the state. Moreover, when women gain property rights-usually after being widowed-they become targets of violence by members of the family or community. Therefore, instead of being economically empowering, property is itself a reason for violence against women. She expresses satisfaction that Due to the collective efforts of her NGO, knowledge levels among Dalit women have increased and they are assuming leadership roles in the village community.

The third Pride of Lucknow award was conferred on noted Urdu author Anees Ashfaq. His work ‘Dukhyare’ highlighting his close relationship with elder brother carries the undertones of declining affluent culture of Lucknow. Elated though to receive the award, he considers ‘Qalam’ as his biggest award. “My writings are useless until they fail to strike a chord with genuine readers,” he said on his felicitation. So what make him pursue writing in Urdu? “I was an avid reader at the age of 18-19. Credit goes to my mother for imparting me lessons in Urdu and shaping my language as it is today.” He expresses concern at the declining habit of reading in today’s youngsters and their overriding ambitions to become stars overnight. He, however, lauds the initiative of Lucknow Society and stresses such rendezvous should be encouraged as they serve as a platform to bring genuine writers together and instills awareness among people. His writings reflect genuine critical analysis of the contemporary scenario. He believes that writings on Lucknow today are not portraying it in true light. With his desire for cultural revival of the city, his upcoming next novel is also set in Lucknow.

With conferring of these four awards, honouring of the dignitaries at the festival came to an end. We at Lucknow Society are thrilled to award best of talent in the city and will continue to reward blossoming excellence in the years to come.



TEAM (2017):

Our Patron:
Dr. Aziz Qureshi
Ex. Governor - Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand & Mizoram

 

Festival Team:
Shamim A. Aarzoo
Founder & CEO

Akansha
Director Festival

Shaheer A. Mirza
Kapil Pal
Pankaj Prasun
Aftab Ali Khan



VOLUNTEER (2017):
 
Joohi Kumar
Volunteer Head

Akash Jaiswal
Anam Waheed
Ashutosh Gupta
Atif Aleem
Harshvardhan Kedia
Itaat Amin
Saamir Siddiqui
Shashwat Pandey
Shazir Siddiqui
Shipra Saxena
Shreshthi Srivastava
Sumedha Tankha
Trisha Singh
Vidushee Singh


DELEGATES (2017):

Abhisar Sharma
Ankit Lal
Anup Jalota
Arun Pandey
Asaduddin Owaisi
Ashutosh
Bharathi S Pradhan
Divya Dutta
Jayant Chaudhary
Jyotiraditya Scinidia
Kanhaiya Kumar
Laxmi Agarwal
Mallika Dua
Md Faisal
Mridula Garg
Nandita Pandey
Neelesh Mishra
Ravi Kishan
Sampat Saral
Sandeep Nath
Sanjay Singh
Shatrughan Sinha
Sunil Singh Yadav
Varun Gandhi
Vinod Dua


CONTACT:

LUCKNOW LITERARY FESTIVAL® (लखनऊ साहित्य महोत्सव®)
C/O LUCKNOW Society®
Sector 21/250, Indira Nagar
Lucknow – 16 (U.P.) INDIA
Phone: +91 97959 23232
Email:info@lucknowliteraryfestival.com/
lucknowliteraryfestival@gmail.com

 



Editions
1st Edition of Lucknow Literary Festival - 23–24 March 2013

2nd Edition of Lucknow Literary Festival - 1–2 February 2014

3rd Edition of Lucknow Literary Festival - 13–15 February 2015

4th Edition of Lucknow Literary Festival - 19–21 February 2016

5th Edition of Lucknow Literary Festival - 10–12 November 2017

6th Edition of Lucknow Literary Festival - 28–30 December 2018





Lucknow's literary festival begins today (An article from Times of India dated 23rd March, 2013)

The first ever literary festival in Lucknow is all set to begin from
Saturday. The two-day fest organised by Lucknow Society in association with
The Times of India will witness litterateurs from across the country that will
have discussions on Hindi, English, Urdu, and Awadhi languages. The star
attraction of day one is discussion on 'Women Empowerment: Right to
Expression' where Dolly Thakore, Prof Roop Rekha Verma, Tom Alter will be in
conversation with Saba Naqvi.

There will also be an event called as Social Network: The New Age Mantra.
Lucknow's Got Talent will attract young minds to the fest.
"The idea is to push brand Lucknow by putting forth the wealth of literature
that the city has to offer whether it is Urdu shayari or Hindi literature produced
by greats like Prem Chand. We want Lucknow to be known for more than just
the nawabs and begums. This event will also help in boosting tourism," said
Kanak Rekha Chauhan, one of the organizers.
The two days will see discussions on wide range of topics associated with
culture, cinema, society and journalism. There will be 13 book launches and
around 50 events like workshops, book reading sessions, Lucknow Got Talent.
According to the organisers, there will 75 writers, poets who have confirmed
their presence. To name a few, senior poet Naresh Saxena, journalist and
writer Vinod Mehta, Saeed Naqvi, Amish Tripathi, historian Veena Oldenburg
Talwar, super commando comic writer Anupam Sinha, script writer Atul Tiwari.
The cultural evenings will see song writer Neelesh Mishra presenting his songs
and story programme, rock concert by the band, Faridkot. Ankit Chadha will
present Dastangoi on Sant Kabir and qawaali by Murli Raju Qawwals.







4. Lucknow Dance and Music Festival: Organized by the Uttar Pradesh Tourism Department, the Lucknow Dance and Music Festival showcases classical dance forms like Kathak, Bharatanatyam, Odissi, and various musical performances. It aims to promote the traditional arts of India and is usually held in the month of February.

Music and dance in Lucknow has been much influenced by the Mughal rule India. The kings were known to lead a life of pleasure and their main source of entertainment was to indulge in music and dance. The royal courts had some of the best dancers and musicians of Lucknow. The performances in dance & music in Lucknow was something that was worth watching. Even today, various artists all over India keep Lucknow music and dance alive. The realm of fine arts flourished during the Mughal rule and Lucknow emerged as one of the best places to indulge in music and dance.
Lucknow is famous for its collection of classical music that is called as Hindustani classical music. The various ragas, compositions and beats were highly inspired by the poetry written by the famous poets and literary figures. Lucknow traditional music is highly evolved and every detail is taken into attention while singing so as to impart the right feel and the meaning.
The famous Lucknow Gharana was created in the royal courts of the Nawabs of Lucknow. This Gharana inspired major dance forms like Kathak, which is the classical dance of the north of India. Today, the rich tradition of music and dance of Lucknow is kept alive by various exponents and preachers through various concerts and cultural programmes.


The Mahindra Sanatkada Festival in Lucknow offers a variety of cultural events, including dastaangoi, music, dance, and theatre, as well as literary sessions, shopping, and food. The festival showcases the sweetness and uniqueness of the Lucknowi zubaan (language) and highlights the art and craft of the region. Visitors can also enjoy a wide range of food options from popular food joints. The festival will culminate with the Awadhi Home Cooked Food Festival. 

The ongoing Mahindra Sanatkada Festival has come up with a blend of cultural events during the five-day event that is underway at Safed Baradari, Kaiserbagh. From dastaangoi, music, dance to theatre there is a lot being offered to the visitors besides the literary sessions, shopping and food. We bring out the action from the opening day. Dastango Mehmood Abdi, a lawyer by profession, says that sweetness in Lucknowi zubaan is a beautiful amalgamation of Hindi and Urdu and Awadhi dialect. “Jo sweetness hai Lucknow ki zubaan mein wo Awadhi se ayi hai. The strength of our language is such that even in a crowd Lucknowites could be singled out when they speak,” says Abdi. He also talked about taqsali zubaan (as a coin minting unit was established in Chowk area) which diluted purity of language like nihari became nahari, taqt became thakat and so on. Lucknowite Askari Naqvi presented three ghazals of Meer Taqi Meer. He was well-supported by Naveen Mishra, Mohd Rafi, Tushar Sahai, Harshwardhan Singh Negi, Aditya Pratap Singh, Aaditya and Abhieraj Shahi. 

“Tried adding a new dimension to my strength of performance such as dastaangoi and sozkhwani. This is the first time I have performed with a band which plays mix of classical instruments like sitar, tabla and shehnai along with modern devices,” shares Askari. The play Taking Threads,held at the Baradari by Swatantra Talim, team turned out to be a well-curated act where live display of threads, weaving, sharp script, strong narration and smart acts were elegantly weaved together to showcase the life of artisans. The play was inspired by real-life stories of women artisans of chikan-kaarigari . 

“We have curated events that highlight art and craft in literal sense. Such meaningful presentations create awareness about our indigenous crafts,” says Sanatkada founder Madhvi Kuckreja. Besides, Neelakshi Rai captivated the audience with her kathak performance on songs like Chupke Chupke Raat Din and Hamari Atariya Pe. The attraction for visitors at the fest is not just the shopping and cultural arena. Options are available at the Baradari open area and at the Salempur House lawns. “We tried light options like chaat, piping hot pakori besides the home-cooked snacks at Naimatkhan stall. But the real action is at the lawns where kebabs and kulcha-nihari stalls are set up. The perfect ending was with Kashmiri chai with malai,” adds a visitor, Umesh Gupta. Popular food joints like Raheem’s, Tundey Kababi, Tiwari Chaat and Ah So Yum have been placed at the venue. From dimsums, bao, sushi, Rajasthani food, home-cooked khichda and Awadhi food, options are aplenty.The highlight of the Sunday afternoon will be the most awaited Awadhi Home Cooked Food Festival, that sees a big turnout of foodies.

A puzzle, a riddle, an emotion, a passion, a way of life for some, a waste of time for others. It has a thousand names and as many meanings. It inspires great works of art, moves mountains, demolishes kingdoms; it also manifests in sweet nothings, a stolen look, a dried flower in a forgotten book, that crumbles upon touch. It’s universal and personal, unbearable longing and indescribable ecstasy, vulnerable as a teardrop, defiant as a mountain top.

Love is definitely what has kept us going for 15 years to bring you this labour of love, this celebration of Lucknow and of handicrafts, this beautiful, chaotic, potpourri of experiences that is the Mahindra Sanatkada Lucknow Festival. And if you haven’t already guessed by now, the theme for this year’s exploration is Aashiqana Lucknow.

“na haarā hai ishq aur na duniyā thakī hai diyā jal rahā hai havā chal rahī hai”

Here’s to walking through a city that is aashiqana not only in its people and places but also in its stories, memories, food, art, language and cityscapes. Why aashiqui, though? Some say aashiqui is synonymous with peace, and some say junoon. But the beauty of aashiqui lies in how there are multiple layers of emotions leading to diverse interpretations and manifestations of it. Aashiqui is not right, not wrong, it just is.

Come celebrate aashiqui with us. And while we’re at it, let's experience Ishq-e-Majazi, Ishq-e-Haqiqi and all things in between, walking the tight ropes of humanity and the social fabric that it exists in, all against the backdrop of a very Aashiqana Lucknow.

The much-awaited MSLF is back in its 15th edition and yes it has all the usual sights, sounds

and experiences that you have come to love over the years. The festival will host a series of performances, discussions, installations and a well-researched, experiential exhibition on the theme, apart from the usual food, crafts bazaar, qissagoi and baitbaazi sessions that you have come to love and expect over the years.

The Weaves and Crafts Bazaar showcases handcrafted products from over 100 artisans from all over the country under the majestic Safed Baradari. The heritage walks and tours explore the various popular and sometimes unknown facets of this beautiful city which include the homes of lucknow, the qasbas, heritage sites, food walk, with many more interesting and anecdotal qisse weaved with facts and history. The Literary Guftgu is a series of theme based talks and discussions that serve to highlight the living heritage and culture of the city. The food stalls showcase the best culinary traditions of Lucknow and the Awadhi Home Cooked Food Festival aka Sunday Food Festival is something that entices visitors in droves every year. Not to be left behind, the scintillating live performances, including the much-awaited Dawn Concert every year, bring in art lovers and aficionados from all walks of life, to share an experience as a community. With workshops, discussions, films, theatre, music, poetry, food, shopping, walks, book releases, exhibitions – This 5-day community mela has grown into an experience that draws in visitors by the thousands every year, both from within the city and from all over the country.

Dedicated to the memory of Late Indira Mahindra who continues to inspire the core values of the festival, the Mahindra Sanatkada Lucknow Festival is built upon the very principles that Indira Mahindra lived by – To bring together people from all walks of life and celebrate the rich culture of our country.

ik lafz-e-mohabbat kā adnā ye fasānā hai
simTe to dil-e-āshiq phaile to zamāna hai

The 15th edition will feature an exemplary line-up of artists and performers, with Voctronica, the country's first ever all-vocal orchestra, Banat and Tamara, artists who perform folk music fusion of western and eastern culture, Parmesh Shahni, Naman Ahuja, Mala Sinha, Prahlad Singh Tippaniya, Kavya Saxena on a series of theme based talks and discussions at our Literary Guftgu. These are just a few names. The city will be grooving to the tunes of Ishq for all the 5 days of the festival.

We invite you to come fall in love again with the city and taste the inimitable flavours of Aashiqana Lucknow.

2 - 6 February, 2024
Safed Baradari & Salempur House, Qaiser Bagh

Launched in 2010, the Mahindra Sanatkada Lucknow Festival is an annual event centred around a handicrafts exhibition and sale showcasing products made by artisans from across the country. The festival, which spans five days in the first week of February, also features talks, workshops, walking tours, book launches, exhibitions, film screenings and cultural performances.

Each year, the festival organised by the Sanatkada Trust, has a different theme that explores a specific aspect of Lucknow and defines its visual aesthetics and performances. These have included ‘Feminists of Awadh’ (2014), which spotlighted female icons from Lucknow; ‘Lucknow ki Rachi Bass Tehzeeb’ (2016), which celebrated the different communities that have enriched the city; and ‘Lucknowi Bawarchikhane’ (2022), which documented the different dishes of the region. This year, the theme of the festival is Raqs-o-Mausiqi meaning ‘time of music, pleasure and comfort’.

The speakers and performers of the previous editions of the Mahindra Sanatkada Lucknow Festival were mythologist Devdutt Pattanaik, scholar Rosie Llewellyn-Jones, singers Shubha Mudgal and Tajdar Junaid and the bands Alif and Indian Ocean.

The 14th edition of the festival is scheduled to take place in February 2023. This year, artists and performers at Mahindra Sanatkada Festival include Avahan-The Band, Kathak performance by Shinjini Kulkarni, a lecture on ‘Music Archiving’ by archivist Irfan Zuberi, tabla performance by Pandit Anindo Chatterjee and a conversation on ‘Influence of Awadhi Awadhi-Lucknowi influence on Indian Cinema—films, music and songs’ with Muzaffar Ali and Atul Tiwari. Other attractions at the Mahindra Sanatkada Lucknow festival include the Weaves and Crafts Bazaar, Heritage Walks, Literary Guftgu, food stalls showcasing the culinary traditions of the city, workshops, discussions, films, theatre and much more. With such a wide range of art offerings, this festival celebrates both the culturally-rich Awadh region, as well as the entire country.







5. Lucknow International Mango Festival: As the name suggests, this festival celebrates the king of fruits, mango. It features various varieties of mangoes, mango-based delicacies, cultural performances, and competitions. The festival is typically held during the mango season, which is from May to July.

The luscious taste of freshly plucked mangoes, the breath-taking view of mango-laden trees, accompanied by the soft, fresh fragrant breeze – visit Vintage Village at Gulripurwa for the Mango Festival this Sunday, 26th June 2022. The event is organised by the Lucknow Farmer’s Market in association with the Awadh Manho Growers Association.

Enjoy the glorious experience of a morning at a mango orchard with celebrity chefs, storytelling, mango-eating competition, orchard walks, tractor rides, mango chutney and pickle competitions, archery, swimming, bullock cart ride, tug of war and many other fun activities on June 26th, from 6 am to 1 pm. This will be followed by a Mango Show on June 28th in collaboration with CISH at Rehmankhera, which includes a Mango Exhibition, Mango Museum, sale of mango by-products, Farmers’ Market, cultural events, mango food festival and more!

It is an opportunity for enthusiastic people of all ages and from all walks of life to come together and connect over a common interest – mangoes! The tour is not just about looking around, but enables visitors to buy directly from the farmers, discover local art, craft & culture.

This is the 10th year of the Mango Festival, which was conceptualised by Jyotsna Kaur Habibullah to connect city dwellers with their roots and experience the joys of being in a mango orchard. The Lucknow Mango Festival is also an attempt to conserve and keep alive traditional varieties of mangoes, and the food culture and crafts associated with it. From a single day event, the Mango Festival has evolved into the Lucknow Farmers Market, which provides an online platform to growers, artisans, farmers and start-ups working on sustainable living solutions, allowing them to connect directly with the consumers.

Known as the king of all fruits, mangoes, aren't just ruling the streets of Lucknow currently but have also taken over the huge, Awadh Shilp Gram! If you are a mango fan too, there is no other place you'd rather be at other than the Mango Festival at Awadh Shilp Gram in the city, where over 800 varieties of the favourite summer fruit are on display.

This exotic Mango Mohotsav also has on sale mango products like cakes, pickles, icecreams and a lot more! So if you identify as mango lover of an extreme proportion and want to learn more about the history and farming of the fruit, head out to the Lucknow Aam Mahotsav now before 7th of July.

The Aam Mahotsav in Lucknow features mango varieties from several states and houses over 100 stalls by local traders, farmers and horticulturists. On display are mangoes and mango saplings from Uttarakhand, Bihar, Madhya Pradesh and Haryana, in addition to Uttar Pradesh, as a representation of pan-India mango produce.

The range here is diverse and unending, starting from Dusshehri, Langra, Safeda Chausa, Amrapali, Bamboo Green to Fazli, Mallika, Krishnabhog, Mohanbhog, Bangalore, Neelam, Kesar, Malihabad Safeda and Tambora varieties.

At least six varieties of Chausa mangoes, namely Gaurjeet, Rataul, Khasulkhas, Gulab Jamun and Jardalu glass mangoes are also part of the display along with peculiar hybrids of Sindhu, Arunika, Pusa and Surya. Colourful mangoes like Huranara, Surkha Matiyara, Yakuti and Gulabkhas add further to its wide banquet.

The festival aims to promote the sale of unknown or unpopular mango varieties and their derived products, among the Lucknow people, boosting sales for farmers across the country. To pack up excitement for the same, the Mango festival is also hosting programmes like Mango Chowk, Mango Bazaar, Ajab-Ajab Mango, Mango Nursery, Mango Dish and Mango Inam and so on.

These events will help channel useful information to concerned departments, scientists, exporters, and makers of mango products, in consultation with mango farmers on all aspects of production, processing, marketing, export and quality enhancement of mangoes. The one stop centre will benefit all those who either wish to start mango farming, or indulge in related business prospects such as making, selling and exporting of mango, mango liquor or mango murabba and even conducting horticulture studies.

Hailing from Nabipanah village of Malihabad, the pavilion of Awadh Mango Growers Horticulture Society at the Lucknow Aam Mahotsav has put up about 246 varieties of mangoes. A particular variant here known as Modi Mango is attracting visitors, for its made by tying Mango to Tukmi in a unique way, said Upendra Kumar Singh. The Modi Mango tree bears a fruit every 12 year, adding the feature of rarity to the fruit too.

Additionally, the Dasheri banging fruit, named after its maturation technique of using state paper, is gaining popularity. Varieties of 'Ambika', 'Arunika' and Pusa Shrestha are also gaining visitors’ interest.

National Award Winner, Horticulturist SC Shukta has also set up here. This features over 178 varieties of mangoes, where the special Maharishi Bhrigu is the centre of attraction. This is a one kilogram single piece that is very juicy and sweet, SC Shukla reportedly said. The display of 'Bhrigu Mango', Narada, Lalima, Seven-inch Lambodar, Surkhapara varieties are further adding an edge to this stall.


Another stall of Central Institute of Horticulture, Rahmankheda is a must-visit stop here. Showcasing about 750 varieties of mangoes, this stall is the talk of the fest for its 'Nawab Us Amdi', Elaichi, Alif Laila, Rogini Zarda that is being liked by all!

The Aam Mahotsav is really a celebration for all mango lovers out there and you can find an array of products made from the fruit. Visitors can indulge in delectable offerings like mango cake and mango sweets and other processed mango products native of MP and Uttarakhand also. Besides products, people and horticulture enthusiasts, who are interested in gardening or starting their own mango farms can also buy saplings and small plants.

Location: Avadh Shilpgram, Amar Shaheed Path, Lucknow

Time: 11 AM to 9 PM

Dates: Till July 7

For those who came in late, 17-18 June 2017 has officially been announced as the Mango Weekend ( for want of a better term) at Ramada Lucknow. The weekend promises to be the ultimate celebration of the King of Fruits, in a multitude of gastronomic avatars, through Saturday and Sunday – holding pride of place for the Saturday Stories and being the centerpiece of delicacies as we celebrate the Father’s Day Brunch on 18 June 2017.

In order to procure the best of mangoes the state offers, the Ramada Lucknow team travelled to Malihabad, which along with Kakori and Mal form the Mango Belt of Uttar Pradesh. The destination was the mango orchards of Bhupendra Singh, popularly known as “Raja Sahab Mall” – the uncrowned Raja of Mangoes.

About the Mangoes of Malihabad
Did you know that India ranks first among world’s mango producing countries, accounting for 52.63 per cent of the total world’s mango production of 19 million tonnes ? Uttar Pradesh has the largest area of 0.27 million hectares under mango, and the major portion of it lie in the mango belt of Uttar Pradesh.

The mango plantations of Malihabad were developed by Pathans, under the royal patronage of the Nawabs of Lucknow. Among the different varieties of mangoes grown in Malihabd, Dussheri is the most popular variety. Besides Dussehri, other varieties of mangoes such as Chausa, Fazli, Lucknowa, Jauhari, Safeda, etc. are also grown here.

The Ramada Lucknow team was warmly welcomed at Raja Saab’s abode, and got to know more about the fabled varieties of mangoes such as the Husenera, Mallika & Gulab Khas that make up for some divine culinary experiences. They also shared notes and tips (some of it completely innovative) that were intended to be a part of the Mango Weekend at Ramada Lucknow.

The team procured the best quality mangoes straight from the mango capital, which would form the central ingredient to the weekend celebration planned at Ramada Lucknow for 17-18 June 2017, both days inclusive.

Mango Festival, platform to increase income of farmers: Yogi
Lucknow, July 14 (UNI) Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath said on Friday that the markets of Europe are waiting for the mangoes of Uttar Pradesh and urged the farmers not to take shortcuts but to focus on quality and prepare products as per the demand of the market. Inaugurating the three-day UP Mango Festival 2023 at Avadh Shilpgram in Lucknow, Yogi said, "In Russia, mangoes are being sold at Rs 800 per kg, but it costs Rs
190 to send mangoes through cargo from here. That means if a farmer exports mangoes to Russia, he will get a net profit of more than Rs 600. We have to take the mangoes from here to every corner of the world. The markets of Europe are waiting for the mangoes from UP." He asked the farmers to avoid shortcuts, prioritise quality, and prepare their products in accordance with market demands. "Our government is working on the Beej Se Bazar Tak' (from seed to market) approach to increase the income of farmers.
The CM said that during the Global Investors Summit, the government sent teams to a number of countries. "We have to explore the global market for horticulture crops, and through Indian Missions abroad, we should organise exhibitions showcasing agricultural products related to UP," he said.
Asserting that the mango festival is a platform to increase the income of farmers, he said, "As per Prime Minister Narendra Modi's intention, the UP government is taking all necessary steps in the interest of the farmers."
Yogi said, "Our government has built four-pack houses in the state. Recently, we got the
opportunity to send two tonnes of mangoes to Dubai from the pack house in Varanasi, and we will have to organise similar program in the pack houses in Saharanpur, Amroha, and Lucknow." He said that in order to bring horticulture crops to the international market, agricultural scientists and officers of the Horticulture Department will need to work together. "Only then will we be able to explore new avenues and give the agricultural and horticultural products of UP a different identity," he said.
Producers, buyers, sellers, and exporters participated in the mango festival. Aligarh's mango buyer, Dr Mobinuddin Khan, said that CM Yogi's effort resulted in a successful Aamras program in Russia's capital, Moscow, last week.
Mango seller Latish Bhatia from Bahrain said that this festival is very important for the mangoes of UP. "We export two to three tonnes of mangoes every week. CM Yogi is constantly trying to give a new identity to the mangoes. This will greatly benefit the mango farmers as well as those doing business with mango products," he said.
Before the programme, Yogi inspected an exhibition showcasing various products made from mangoes and released the souvenir of the Mango Festival 2023. He also felicitated farmers and traders from various districts of the state who have excelled in the field of mango production. 






6. The Ganjing Carnival: 

The Celebration of ‘Hazratganj Sundays’: 

The Lucknow Ganjing Carnival was started in 2015 by Lucknow District Administration to give back the city its old world charm of Nawabi era and Victorian feel. The carnival, which is organized once a month during summer season and twice a month during winter season at Mahatma Gandhi Marg in Hazratganj, encapsulates all the distinctive features of Hazratganj of the bygone era. Artists can demonstrate their talent from a large stage, which is set up in front of multi-level parking. The stage is also used for various musical, dance and cultural performances by popular celebrity-artists. Visitors can watch movies based on Lucknow’s history and culture at Soochna Kendra Library office in Hazratganj. Nukkad natak, art gallery, selfie zone, kid zone, photo exhibition, to name a few, are some of the highlights of the carnival. Food enthusiasts can relish their taste buds at the food stalls, starting from Raheem’s, Tunday Kebabi, Wahid Biryani, Naushi-jaan, Moti Mahal and Prakash Kulfi.

The Ganjing Carnival is a five-hour event in Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh that celebrates the heritage of Hazratganj, a shopping area in the city. The carnival includes music and dance performances, food courts, an art gallery, photo exhibitions, and selfie zones. The district administration has decided to organize the carnival once a month, with each month having a different theme. 

The carnival features standard features such as a food court, art gallery, handicraft, talent hunt, and photo exhibition. The carnival also includes selfie zones with large cutouts of Lucknow's heritage buildings. 

The carnival celebrates Hazratganj's 200-year history. Hazratganj is one of Lucknow's oldest and most iconic areas, with a rich history dating back to the time of the Nawabs of Awadh. The area was originally known as Ganj-e-Sabun, which means "soap market," as it was a hub for soap makers during the 18th century. Hazratganj is now a major Victorian-style shopping area that houses showrooms, shopping complexes, restaurants, hotels, cafés, theaters, offices, and businesses. 

A stroll or window shopping at Lucknow’s oldest and prestigious shopping destination, Hazrat Ganj, is often known as Ganj-ing. Hazratganj, the 200+ year old elite shopping and entertainment zone, has seen quite a happening past. In 1810, the first nawab of Awadh, Saadat Ali Khan, brought up the idea of such a place. After him, it was Nawab Nasiruddin Haider who nurtured this dream and commissioned many buildings and Kothis in Hazrat Ganj. Earlier called Munnawar Baksh probably because of Munnawar Kothi built there, the area was renamed to Hazrat Ganj in 1842, drawing from the nickname of Nawab Amjad Ali Shah who was often lovingly called “Hazrat”.

There was a time when Hazrat Ganj had a distinctive charm with a fine blend of mughal architecture and a victorian feel in the buildings, sidewalks, and even the vehicles and horse-carriages used by the nawabs and the British officers. Pedestrians too used to enjoy the walk across the shops, movie theatres, ball room, clock tower, and the coffee house. Today, if we need to relive that era, Hazratganj, the heritage area of Lucknow, needs to be transformed for a while. District Administration of Lucknow did just that when they planned the Ganjing Carnival at Hazratganj Lucknow.

On Sunday May 24, 2015, Hazratganj was made out of bounds for any kind of vehicles from the main crossroad near GPO till the office of the Chief Post Master General. The duration of the Ganjing Carnival was five hours, starting from 5:00 PM till 10:00 PM. District administration put up a great show by setting up stages for Music and Dance performances, Food courts, Art gallery, photo exhibitions, selfie zones with huge cutouts of Lucknow’s heritage buildings and lots more.

The excitement among the crowds was worth taking a note. Lucknowites were flocking in with family members and friends, posing for Picture of lucknow policemen patrolling on horseback at the Ganjing Carnivalpictures, enjoying the food and music, amidst the confidence that they were safe and free to roam about the long stretch of the main street – M.G.Road. Every sidelane that opened    into the main street had police personnel deployed. There were scores of civil defence personnel. A wonderful view was to see the Policemen riding horses for patrolling. What might have helped to ensure safety and  checking any untoward incident was the installation of CCTV cameras on the lamp-posts. It helped in keeping a tab on the small bunch of mischief-makers and spoilsports.

The event was such a huge success among the citizen of Lucknow that the district administration has decided to hold the event once a month during summers and twice a month during rainy season and winters.


Any historical city in the world stands out because of its heritage, culture, cuisine, languages, dialects, people and the typical style of living. Lucknow city, a unique concoction of all such factors is also a representative of the British influence that makes Lucknow a well-known city on the map of Indian tourism. Every city bears a disparate blend of charm and essence, an air about their ambiences, which are its earmark and make them unique in its own way. The parks, markets, monuments, public buildings, which are the essential part of the identity of any city.

Hazratganj is not only a market, but also a representative of the city’s rich heritage and culture, which still continues to attract the generation as it used to era’s back. The true essence of the Nawabi era can be relished completely by spending an evening at this place. This ravishments evening can be termed as ‘Ganjing’ and one can truly comprehend with it if he/she is a true Lucknowite at heart.

The 200+ year-old elite shopping and entertainment zone has seen quite a happening past. It was in 1810 that nawab of Oudh, Saadat Ali Khan came up with such a place in his mind and this dream of his was nurtured by Nawab Naseer-ud-Din Haider who is accredited with construction of numerous Kothis and buildings in that area. The area known by the name Munawwar Baksh, probably because of Munawwar Kothi of that are was later on renamed to Hazrat Ganj years later in 1842, rendering its name from the fourth king of Oudh, Amjad Ali Shah who was often lovingly called ‘Hazarat’

As the marketplace witnessed 100 years of its completion, it saw a massive changeover in European style designed buildings. In order to bring uniformity the complete area was repainted into the same colour-coordinated theme of cream and pink, benches were fixed at every few metres along with elegant European style lampposts and fountains and railings that replicate the Victorian age broad walk. The motive behind this beautification was to uplift and restore the dying popularity of the place. The idea was to restore the place back in its ancient and traditional look along with a touch of modernity.

The District Administration of Lucknow just decided to give back Lucknow its old charm of the perfect blend of the Mughal era and the Victorian feel when they planned the Ganjing Carnival, encapsulating almost all the lineaments of the Hazratganj of the bygone era.

It was on Sunday, May 24, 2015, that Hazratganj witnesses a massive change, the roads were made out of bound for all kind of vehicles, from the main crossroad near GPO till the office of the Chief Post Master General. The announcement of Hazratganj being a no vehicle zone on Sundays along the stretch has already brought back excitement around the boulevard, particularly to those who prefer Hazratganj over swanky shopping malls.

The preparation began from the early morning itself and what lead to the place by the evening left everyone awe struck. The excitement among the crowds was worth taking a note. It was an initiative that was taken to bring the city together for not only reviving the good old days but to inculcate togetherness, joy, laughter, song and what not to count, among the clan and the kin, but coming together of 30,000 souls on a hot summer evening in the heart of the city was surely one unexpected thing to witness. The scorching heat was of no good to keep the enthusiasm of the Youngers to a restricted zone or timing. The city saw the best of fashion and spirit combined in this one evening. The cherry on the cake was a remarkable management of the show with no report of crime or any kind of uneventful circumstances. Every side lane that opened into the main street had police personnel deployed. There were scores of civil defence personnel. A wonderful view was to see the Policemen riding horses for patrolling. What might have helped to ensure safety and checking any untoward incident was the installation of CCTV cameras on the lampposts. It helped in keeping a tab on the small bunch of mischief-makers and spoilsports.

The duration of the Ganjing Carnival was five hours, starting from 5:00 PM till 10:00 PM. The setup included a central stage at the main crossroad for music and dance performance, which was enough to take away hearts of millions by the dazzling decoration and performance to be conducted. Food court, photo exhibition, selfie zone, art gallery, nukkad natak, flash mobs, kid zone, show your talent are just a few to name. You name it and find it at one or the other place in the overall scenario. The place was not just perfect for the fun lovers but was of equally lively for the food lovers. The food zone was set up in front of L.I.C building, where one can find all kind of food to relish their taste buds starting from the Tunday Kebabi to Raheem’s; from ZamZam Biryani (Meeraj) to Naushijaan, and the icing on the cake were the Prakash Kulfi and Gloria Ice-Cream to beat the scorching heat. Where the youngsters were lost in the music and dance, the aged were going down the memory lane to their times when the older version of carnival used to take place, in 1990s, and continued for a week-long time. It used to start during the Christmas duration and was purely based on the pattern of the Goa carnival. The DJ replaced the cassette players, modern music replaced the shehnai performance, art show replaced the puppet show, and the camel rides etc were a few changes that took place in the years that followed.

The fun filled evening was not only a change for the whole of the Lucknow but also gave city a chance to meet a few exciting and enlightening campaigns and programmes too. When the city was found shaking their head over the grooving music there was too found a bunch of youngsters, volunteering for Global Dreams, who were spearheading a campaign to make Lucknow fully literate and propagating the message of- ‘Each One, Teach One’ among the visitors to eradicate illiteracy. A literacy booth was setup and inaugurated by the CDO, Yogesh Kumar where he made an announcement: “The administration is working hard in association with Devi Sansthan to make Lucknow the first fully literate district”. Not only this, but a bunch of young students from various schools including City International, CMS and City Hall came forward and organized a Nukkad Natak that highlighted the importance of literacy.

Considering present weather conditions, available resources and effort needed to keep the tradition of ‘Ganjing’ alive, district administration has decided to organize the carnival once a month. It was even decided that within three week’s time, even free Wi-Fi service would be provided to the visitors. The services would be available from Parivartan Chowk till the middle of Hazratganj, which would be free for first 20 minutes, and will be charged at a minimal rate after that.

The event was such a huge success among the citizen of Lucknow that the district administration has decided to hold the event once a month during summers and twice a month during rainy season and winters. In summers, the carnival will take place on the second Sunday of month and will be held on alternate Sundays rest of the year. Carnival will not take place during the Lucknow Mahotsava. Accordingly, timing for no traffic zone in Hazratganj was also decided 6pm to 11pm in summer (Mar-Oct) and rainy seasons and 5 pm to 10 pm in winters (Nov-Feb).



These festivals and events not only provide entertainment but also offer a glimpse into the rich cultural tapestry of Lucknow, making them an integral part of the city's identity.
