Lucknow Literature Festival: Lucknow Literature Festival celebrates the rich literary heritage of the city. It provides a platform for authors, poets, and literary enthusiasts to come together and engage in discussions, book readings, and performances. The festival typically takes place in January or February.

Lucknow Literary Festival
 

“AAJ BHI KEHTA HAI HAR SAHIB-E NAZAR ROSHAN KHAYAAL,
LUCKNOW ILM-O ADAB MEIN AAP HI APNI MISAAL”
 

The first ever Lucknow Literary Festival is an endeavour of the LUCKNOW Society, which is a non profit organisation dedicated to the cause of promoting & conserving the Culture, Tehzeeb & Heritage of Shaher-e Lucknow. Shamim A. Aarzoo, the founder of the society is instrumental in organising the festival !

The Lucknow Literary Festival is an international literary festival held annually in Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, India since 2013.

The Lucknow Literary Festival is an endeavour of the Lucknow Society, which is a non profit organization dedicated to the cause of promoting & conserving the culture, tehzeeb & heritage of Lucknow. The Lucknow Literary Festival is an initiative that acknowledges new literary talents, honors our legends, while restoring literary tradition of the past, Lucknow’s own unique heritage and also evoking the newer generation’s interest. The event is also replete with entertainment for the literary taste. While, on one hand, the Lucknow Literary Festival has become a hub of the glitz from all across the country, it also dawns the light upon Lucknow's own talent and gives them a stage to showcase themselves in our cultural programs.

It is a 3-day event that celebrates creativity in all its forms. It is held each year in Lucknow, during the month of February/March, and celebrates excellence in Indian and International writing.

As one among the top 6 literary festival in India, as stated by Outlook magazine, It brings together some of the greatest thinkers and writers from across the world. From Nobel laureates to local language writers, Padma Shri holders to debut novelists, every February the most remarkable, witty, sensitive and brilliant collection of authors come together for three days of readings, debates and discussions at one platform. Its programme includes conversations with authors, readings, panel discussions, workshops, book launches, cultural programmes, events for college students and school children. Lucknow Literary Festival plays host to nearly 100 writers from across India, and other countries writing in various Indian languages and English every year. The Lucknow Literary Festival has been adorned with sundry of well - known names and faces that not only grace the event with their presence but also share their experiences, their insights with young and old alike.

The Lucknow Literary Festival too confers "Pride of Lucknow" award and "Wajid Ali Shah" award, which are given to people who have been contributing extraordinarily in different spheres of life. These people may belong to various fields like Hindi writing, Urdu writing, Journalism, Social service etc. These eminent personalities belong to Lucknow and even across India respectively.

Uttar Pradesh, is the land of Amir Khusru, Meer Taqi Meer, Asad Ullah Khan Ghalib, Mir Anees, Mirza Hadi Ruswa, Abdul Halim Sharar, Munshi Premchand, Yashpal, Amrit Lal Nagar, Raghupati Sahai Firaq Gorakhpuri, Asrar-ul-Haq Majaz, Pandit Brij Narain Chakbast, Jigar Moradabadi, Qurratulain Haider  and many others who gave us masterpieces and made epic contributions to Literature. Even today contemporary authors like Javed Akhtar, K P Saxena, Veena Talwar Oldenburg, Neelesh Misra, Prasoon Joshi, etc  have kept the flame of the written word burning bright. Despite the presence of such literary greats, Uttar Pradesh has not had a literary summit for a long time, even though we had a tradition of Kavi Sammelans, Mushairas & Nashists. To carry on this legacy, and consciously try to enlighten the reader, Lucknow Literary Festival is being started at the capital of Uttar Pradesh to promote the literary genius of Uttar Pradesh & Lucknow in particular ! The festival is an effort to bring forth the lutf of languages – Hindi, Urdu, Awadhi & English on a common platform.

Special award ‘Pride of Lucknow’ has also been initiated and presented to 7 legends : Padma Shri Bekal Utsahi – Outstanding Contribution in Awadhi Language; Malikzada Manzoor Ahmed – Outstanding Contribution in Urdu Language; Gopal Das Neeraj – Outstanding Contribution in Hindi Language; Vinod Mehta – Outstanding Contribution in English Language; Padma Shri Runa Banerjee – Outstanding Contribution in Women Empowerment; Jayant Krishna – Outstanding Contribution in Corporate Sector & Heritage Rejuvenation; Padma Shri Raj Bisaria – Outstanding Contribution in Art & Culture !

The Literary festival once again invoke the creative spirit of the city and bring together the scholars from all over the country. The festival witnessed a  diverse spectrum of novelists, playwrights, poets, screenwriters, journalists, lyricists and bloggers which usher in the revival of the city’s literary culture in 2 day festival at 3 auditoriums. Books were launched, contemporary and historical issues were discussed and debated threadbare. Through reading sessions the average reader re-discovered the joys of the books. Inaugurated traditionally with Vandana / Bharat Natyam Performance by Hiroko Fujiwara from Japan. The following books were launched : A Leaf Turns Yellow by Muzaffar Ali; In Good Faith by Saba Naqvi; Toke by Jugal Mody; The Virtuals by Anupam Sinha; Yaad Shaher by Neelesh Misra; Skand Spand by Skand Shukla; Hala Hala Nip by Appu Pen; Mayan by A P Maheshwari; The Sanjay Story by Vinod Mehta; The Oath of Vayuputras by Amish Tripathi; Aakhri Parwaaz by Aadil Rasheed Tilhari. Contemporary discussions were on Women Empowerment – Right to Expression; Social Network – The New Age Mantra; Samkaleen Hindi Kavita – Lokpriyata Ki Chunauti; Urdu Shayri Mein Lucknow Ka Maqaam; Zip Zap Zoom – The Future Comic Universe; Avadhi – Kal Aaj Aur Kal; Regulation on Media; Decoding Young Minds; Gadgets – Technology Upgrade; Wajid Ali Shah; A Century In Indian Cinema. Special Workshops were also conducted for the benefit of the audience like, Script Factory – How to write a movie script by Atul Tiwari; Aati Hai Urdu Zabaan Aate Aate to learn Urdu language through special software by TCS; History of Dastangoi by Ankit Chadha. ‘Tribute to the Urdu Poets of Lucknow’ & a paper on ‘Faiz Ahmed Faiz Ka Lucknow’ were another attractions of the festival.

There was also an entertainment quotient to the festival which highlighted through the cultural events like Dastangoi on Kabir, Sufi Qawwali, Mushaira, Performance of Neelesh Misra & Live Concert by Faridkot band. Award winning documentary ‘Nishaan-e Lucknow’ which highlighted the symbol of Fish in Awadh was also screened. The event further boost the magnetic pull of the city’s rich architectural heritage through photo exhibition of rare & new photographs of Lakhnau. Calligraphy, Vintage Car Exhibition, Chikan & Handicrafts on display were also added to the flavour of the festival. The world renowned zaiqa of Awadh was also the quintessential ingredient in the culture cauldron of the city. ‘Lucknow’s Got Talent’ was the another attraction for the Youth ! Naseeruddin Shah, Padma Shri Bekal Utsahi, Padma Shri Gulzar Dehlvi, Amaresh Mishra, Dolly Thakore, Veena Talwar Oldenburg, Roshan Taqui, Raja Mehmoodabad, Asif Mirza (direct descendant of Nawab Wajid Ali Shah from Kolkata), Padma Shri Runa Banerjee, Padma Shri Raj Bisaria, Padma Shri O P Agarwal, Waseem Bareilvi, Munawwar Rana, Malikzada Manzoor Ahmed, Anwar Jalalpuri, Sharib Rudaulvi, Pankaj Srivastava, Brijesh Pandey, Anirudh Singh, Amrendra Tripathi, Prof Roop Rekha Verma, were some of the other participants of the festival. It was an opportunity to bring in the traveller as well as the ‘literary tourist’ to Lucknow. As an annual event, we hope to see it grow into a melting pot of idea’s and cultures where litterateurs come share and enjoy in the city of Ada, Andaaz and Adab.

 

“EK LUTF-E KHAAS DIL KO TERI AARZOO ME HAI,
ALLAH JAANE KITNI KASHISH LUCKNOW ME HAI”


About LLF:

“AAJ BHI KEHTA HAI HAR SAHIB-E NAZAR ROSHAN KHAYAAL,
LUCKNOW ILM-O ADAB MEIN AAP HI APNI MISAAL”

Uttar Pradesh, is the land of Amir Khusru, Meer Taqi Meer, Asad Ullah Khan Ghalib, Mir Anees, Mirza Hadi Ruswa, Abdul Halim Sharar, Munshi Premchand, Yashpal, Amrit Lal Nagar, Raghupati Sahai Firaq Gorakhpuri, Asrar-ul-Haq Majaz, Pandit Brij Narain Chakbast, Jigar Moradabadi, Qurratulain Haider and many others who gave us masterpieces and made epic contributions to Literature. Even today contemporary authors like Javed Akhtar, Veena Talwar Oldenburg, Neelesh Misra, Prasoon Joshi, etc have kept the flame of the written word burning bright. Despite the presence of such literary greats, Uttar Pradesh has not had a literary summit for a long time, even though we had a tradition of Kavi Sammelans, Mushairas & Nashists. To carry on this legacy, and consciously try to enlighten the reader, Lucknow Literary Festival is organized in the capital of Uttar Pradesh to promote the literary genius of Uttar Pradesh & Lucknow in particular. The festival is an effort to bring forth the lutf of languages – Hindi, Urdu, Awadhi & English on a common platform.

The first ever Lucknow Literary Festival (लखनऊ साहित्य महोत्सव) is an endeavour of the LUCKNOW Society, which is a non profit organisation dedicated to the cause of promoting & conserving the Culture, Tehzeeb & Heritage of Shahar-e Lucknow. Shamim A. Aarzoo, the founder of the society is instrumental in organizing the festival. Lucknow Literary Festival acknowledges new literary talents, honors our legends, while restoring literary tradition of the past, Lucknow’s own unique heritage and also evoking the newer generation’s interest. The event is also replete with entertainment for the literary taste. Lucknow Literary Festival is, by far, India’s only literary festival organized solely on the independent efforts and endeavors of a youth organization with an average team age of 24 years.

The Lucknow Literary Festival has been adorned with sundry of well – known names and faces that not only grace the event with their presence but also share their experiences, their insights with young and old alike.

While, on one hand, the Lucknow Literary Festival has become a hub of the glitz from all across the country, it also dawns the light upon Lucknow’s own talent and gives them a stage to showcase themselves in our cultural programs.

“EK LUTF-E KHAAS DIL KO TERI AARZOO ME HAI,
ALLAH JAANE KITNI KASHISH LUCKNOW ME HAI”



PRIDE OF LUCKNOW AWARD:

Besides Wajid Ali Shah award, the Pride of Lucknow awards were conferred on three distinguished luminaries.

The Pride of Lucknow award for the contribution to Hindi literature was bestowed on author Shiv Murti. Born on March 11, 1950, Shiv Murti is one of the leading voices in contemporary Hindi fiction. Hailing from humble background, his life was full of struggle. But the best steel is made when iron is passed in hottest temperature. This holds true for author Shiv Murti. A person of few words, he let his works do the talking for him. His first story ‘Mujhe Jeena Hai’ followed by ‘Paanphool’ was published when he was studying in 12th standard. Thereafter he never looked back. His works depict the plight of rural folk in true light. Caste politics, power politics, poverty and Dalit problems form the theme of his works. One of his best novels ‘Triyacharitra’ portrays the life of a young girl who is false implicated for having an illicit relationship and as a consequence has to bear the brutal punishment handed out by gram panchayat. This novel was later made into a movie by Basu Chatterjee. Since his works paint a picture of rural life in true fervor, his fans consider him as second Premchand. But he brushes aside this compliment saying: “Premchand is Premchand. I can never replace him.” His other novels are Trishul and Tarpan. Keshar Kasturi is a collection of stories authored by him. Now his fans should gear up for the re- release of his novel ‘Akhiri Chhalang’. Shivmurti has won Kathakram and Hans award in the past. Though he is satisfied with the kind of Hindi works produced today, he expresses concern at the youngsters losing interest in Hindi literature.

The Pride of Lucknow award for excellence in women empowerment was bestowed on Madhvi Kuckreja, a social worker and founder of NGO Vanaangan. Humbled to receive the award, she considers herself fortunate to have won it though she had shifted her base to Lucknow only few years back. She has set up a shop, Sanatkada here that sells handicrafts, functions as a café, a book club and a film club, all rolled into one. Madhvi has supported numerous women-led, grassroots-level organizations to emerge as transparent, vibrant entities that are sensitive to women. Internationally, she has worked on building opinion against women being subjected to violence in Tajikistan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Sri Lanka and Sudan. Before moving to Lucknow, she was earlier working in Bundelkhand for alleviating the problems of Dalit women, who are entangled in triad of poverty, caste discrimination and gender subjugation. Though they have been financially independent for long, Dalit women are subjected to discrimination and violence in all forms manifesting itself through rape, public humiliation, or honor killings. Another common punishment for breaking community rules that is also used simply for vengeance is public stripping and parading of women. Violence can also take an extreme form with lynching of women labeled as witches or dayans. Domestic violence however, cuts through religious, caste and class boundaries-dowry related death caused by “accidental” burning of women thrives in the state. Moreover, when women gain property rights-usually after being widowed-they become targets of violence by members of the family or community. Therefore, instead of being economically empowering, property is itself a reason for violence against women. She expresses satisfaction that Due to the collective efforts of her NGO, knowledge levels among Dalit women have increased and they are assuming leadership roles in the village community.

The third Pride of Lucknow award was conferred on noted Urdu author Anees Ashfaq. His work ‘Dukhyare’ highlighting his close relationship with elder brother carries the undertones of declining affluent culture of Lucknow. Elated though to receive the award, he considers ‘Qalam’ as his biggest award. “My writings are useless until they fail to strike a chord with genuine readers,” he said on his felicitation. So what make him pursue writing in Urdu? “I was an avid reader at the age of 18-19. Credit goes to my mother for imparting me lessons in Urdu and shaping my language as it is today.” He expresses concern at the declining habit of reading in today’s youngsters and their overriding ambitions to become stars overnight. He, however, lauds the initiative of Lucknow Society and stresses such rendezvous should be encouraged as they serve as a platform to bring genuine writers together and instills awareness among people. His writings reflect genuine critical analysis of the contemporary scenario. He believes that writings on Lucknow today are not portraying it in true light. With his desire for cultural revival of the city, his upcoming next novel is also set in Lucknow.

With conferring of these four awards, honouring of the dignitaries at the festival came to an end. We at Lucknow Society are thrilled to award best of talent in the city and will continue to reward blossoming excellence in the years to come.



TEAM (2017):

Our Patron:
Dr. Aziz Qureshi
Ex. Governor - Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand & Mizoram

 

Festival Team:
Shamim A. Aarzoo
Founder & CEO

Akansha
Director Festival

Shaheer A. Mirza
Kapil Pal
Pankaj Prasun
Aftab Ali Khan



VOLUNTEER (2017):
 
Joohi Kumar
Volunteer Head

Akash Jaiswal
Anam Waheed
Ashutosh Gupta
Atif Aleem
Harshvardhan Kedia
Itaat Amin
Saamir Siddiqui
Shashwat Pandey
Shazir Siddiqui
Shipra Saxena
Shreshthi Srivastava
Sumedha Tankha
Trisha Singh
Vidushee Singh


DELEGATES (2017):

Abhisar Sharma
Ankit Lal
Anup Jalota
Arun Pandey
Asaduddin Owaisi
Ashutosh
Bharathi S Pradhan
Divya Dutta
Jayant Chaudhary
Jyotiraditya Scinidia
Kanhaiya Kumar
Laxmi Agarwal
Mallika Dua
Md Faisal
Mridula Garg
Nandita Pandey
Neelesh Mishra
Ravi Kishan
Sampat Saral
Sandeep Nath
Sanjay Singh
Shatrughan Sinha
Sunil Singh Yadav
Varun Gandhi
Vinod Dua


CONTACT:

LUCKNOW LITERARY FESTIVAL® (लखनऊ साहित्य महोत्सव®)
C/O LUCKNOW Society®
Sector 21/250, Indira Nagar
Lucknow – 16 (U.P.) INDIA
Phone: +91 97959 23232
Email:info@lucknowliteraryfestival.com/
lucknowliteraryfestival@gmail.com

 



Editions
1st Edition of Lucknow Literary Festival - 23–24 March 2013

2nd Edition of Lucknow Literary Festival - 1–2 February 2014

3rd Edition of Lucknow Literary Festival - 13–15 February 2015

4th Edition of Lucknow Literary Festival - 19–21 February 2016

5th Edition of Lucknow Literary Festival - 10–12 November 2017

6th Edition of Lucknow Literary Festival - 28–30 December 2018





Lucknow's literary festival begins today (An article from Times of India dated 23rd March, 2013)

The first ever literary festival in Lucknow is all set to begin from
Saturday. The two-day fest organised by Lucknow Society in association with
The Times of India will witness litterateurs from across the country that will
have discussions on Hindi, English, Urdu, and Awadhi languages. The star
attraction of day one is discussion on 'Women Empowerment: Right to
Expression' where Dolly Thakore, Prof Roop Rekha Verma, Tom Alter will be in
conversation with Saba Naqvi.

There will also be an event called as Social Network: The New Age Mantra.
Lucknow's Got Talent will attract young minds to the fest.
"The idea is to push brand Lucknow by putting forth the wealth of literature
that the city has to offer whether it is Urdu shayari or Hindi literature produced
by greats like Prem Chand. We want Lucknow to be known for more than just
the nawabs and begums. This event will also help in boosting tourism," said
Kanak Rekha Chauhan, one of the organizers.
The two days will see discussions on wide range of topics associated with
culture, cinema, society and journalism. There will be 13 book launches and
around 50 events like workshops, book reading sessions, Lucknow Got Talent.
According to the organisers, there will 75 writers, poets who have confirmed
their presence. To name a few, senior poet Naresh Saxena, journalist and
writer Vinod Mehta, Saeed Naqvi, Amish Tripathi, historian Veena Oldenburg
Talwar, super commando comic writer Anupam Sinha, script writer Atul Tiwari.
The cultural evenings will see song writer Neelesh Mishra presenting his songs
and story programme, rock concert by the band, Faridkot. Ankit Chadha will
present Dastangoi on Sant Kabir and qawaali by Murli Raju Qawwals.



WEBSITES:

1. http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/articleshow/19138639.cms?utm_source=contentofinterest&utm_medium=text&utm_campaign=cppst
2. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lucknow_Literary_Festival
3. https://lucknowliteraryfestival.com/
