Lucknow Mahotsav: 
(A gala of Nawabi arts, crafts, culture, cuisines & more, Lucknow Mahotsav ties the past with present). Nothing comes as close to telling what Lucknow has been and is all about, as the Lucknow Mahotsav.
 
Lucknow Mahotsav is a 10-day long cultural extravaganza held annually in the month of November or December. It showcases the rich cultural heritage of Lucknow through various performances including classical music and dance, ghazals, qawwalis, and traditional folk performances. The festival also features exhibitions, food stalls, and craft displays. Lucknow Mahotsav is organized every year to showcase Uttar Pradesh Art and Culture and in particular Lucknavi 'Tehzeeb' so as to promote Tourism. One of the objectives of the cultural bonanza is to provide encouragement to the Artisans. Craftsmen from all over the country bring their masterpieces to the festival to the delight of shoppers. Colorful processions, traditional dramas, Kathak dances in the style of Lucknow Gharana, Sarangi and sitar recitals, ghazals, qawalis and thumri produce a cheerful atmosphere during the ten-day-long festival. Exciting events like ekka races, kite flying, cockfighting and other customary village games re-establish an ambience of the bygone Nawabi days.

LUCKNOW MAHOTSAV TELLS THE TALE OF LUCKNOW'S VIBRANT PAST:
Nothing comes as close to telling what Lucknow has been and is all about, as the Lucknow Mahotsav. A kaleidoscope of craft, couture, culture and cuisine, the 10-day mega fair is a cornucopia of colours and cheers in all forms. It literally transports the visitor to the old world charm of the City of Nawabs, as much as to its modern-day delights. Let us, as proud Lucknowites, take you on a trip down memory lane to trace the origin, past, present and possibly the future of this pageant.
It is instructive to recall, that the year 1975 was observed as the Tourism Year and since then, every year, Lucknow Mahotsav has been organized. Even back then, the carnival held a charm and a vibe that was unmatched by others.
Since its humble beginnings, it has become one of the grandest events, not only for Lucknowites welcoming the winters but for thousands of people across the country, many, who use this opportunity to showcase their craft. For us Lucknowites, the Mahotsav marks 10 (or so) days of riveting fun, excitement, a time to reflect on the past and everything that Lucknow is today.


BRINGING HINTS OF NOSTALGIA AMID LAKHNAWIS:
Just the words "Lucknow Mahotsav'' evoke nostalgia and fond remembrance in die-hard Lakhnawis. Mahotsav evenings are remembered by many as gatherings of people from all walks of life, who come to take in the arts of Lucknow, to enjoy the rich Awadhi cuisine, which is symbolic of Lucknow and to catch a fleeting essence of the nawabi culture in the form of Kavi Sammelans, Mushairas and the likes.
In the recent past, Lucknow Mahotsav's festivities have been taken to the next level as national performers and artists have come here to elevate and illuminate Lucknow's forgotten arts and more. These artists come here not only to rekindle the flame of these forgotten arts but to achieve and obtain new heights, to find new meaning within them.


MAHOTSAV BRINGS FORTH FORGOTTEN AWADHI ARTS:
Artisans who are skilled at the centuries-old Zardari, Chikankari and associated works come here to show their wares. Chikankari is one of Lucknow's most lucrative arts and for good reason. It requires skill, precision and years of training, and the artisans of Lucknow have got it down to a T. Textile art is part of a traditional lifestyle and subtly blends with new-age fashion. When at the Mahotsav, you have to indulge in the simple yet elegant work of chikan artists.
And then there's the delectable Lucknowi cuisine. Since Lucknow Mahotsav is a celebration of the city's past, there's no way anyone can miss out on the food. Exotic foods and rich cuisines have always been a part of Lucknow's culture, and the Mahotsav delivers. Here, you can get everything from Tunday ke Kebab to Wahid ki Biryani and then some more. Lucknow is nothing short of a foodie's paradise and in the many years of the Mahotsav, we've learned that we, Lucknow locals, are suckers for our own food.
Over the years, Lucknow Mahotsav has expanded its wings to make way for artists, craftsmen and artisans from areas in Uttar Pradesh and the country but the essence of Lucknow, and its charm is not forgotten for a moment. This is perhaps best quantified in the hordes of Lucknowites who come for the Mahotsav from all parts of the city.


MAHOTSAV HOLDS A SPECIAL PLACE FOR LUCKNOWITES:
It simply goes to show that Lucknowites are curious about their own city and are always looking to find something new around a corner in Lucknow. The Lucknow Mahotsav brings together the galis of Chowk, the swank localities of Gomti Nagar and everything in between. A city within a city, the Mahotsav has been beckoning us since we were children and has not only shaped what the city is today but also the people. The Mahotsav is a place of discovery and serendipity, a place where time stands still and the past is celebrated, making way for the future to come. At the conclusion of each Mahotsav, Lucknowites walk tall and proud, even as they await with eager anticipation for the next version.
 
HISTORY: 
The year 1975-76 was observed and organized in South Asia as The Tourism Year. On this occasion in the motive to promote Lucknow's Art, Culture and Tourism for national and international tourists, the decision to organize the Lucknow Festival was taken. During this period with exception to a few years, Lucknow Mahotsav has been organized every year. Lucknow Mahotsav evening would be adorned with on one hand by the celebrities, famous artists' performances and on the other by renounced classical singers. In this program the upcoming local artists have been provided a special representation on the cultural evenings. In addition, the national as well as local Poets/ Shayars have been provided due representation through Kavi Sammelan and Mushayara.

CUISINES:
Mahotsav is a delight for the connoisseurs of good food as it is the ideal place to pamper the taste buds of the visitors with endless varieties of scrumptious dishes as a wide range of cuisines are available at the festival, including Kesaria Doodh, Kabab-parathas and other mouth-watering non-vegetarian exotic dishes.

ENTERTAINMENT:
The 10 days long festival is one such example. The festival invites many musical as well as comical artists for completing your day in its full sense. The festival celebrated between 25 November and 5 December in Lucknow, the capital of Uttar Pradesh, is a cultural extravaganza. During these 10 days, the entire arena is filled with people enjoying various rides and other poetry/cultural events.


Address: 
Kanshiram Smriti Upwan, Jalvayu Vihar, Ashiyana, Jalvayu Vihar, Lucknow - 226001

Business Information:
Lucknow Mahotsav Sthal in Jalvayu Vihar, Lucknow Lucknow Mahotsav Sthal in Lucknow is one of the leading businesses in the Fair Grounds. Also known for Banquet Halls, Auditoriums, Conference Halls, Event Venues, Exhibition Halls, Fair Grounds and much more. Find Address, Contact Number, Reviews & Ratings, Photos, Maps of Lucknow Mahotsav Sthal, Lucknow.

Location and Overview:
Lucknow Mahotsav Sthal in Jalvayu Vihar, Lucknow is a top player in the category Fair Grounds in the Lucknow. This well-known establishment acts as a one-stop destination servicing customers both local and from other parts of Lucknow. Over the course of its journey, this business has established a firm foothold in it's industry. The belief that customer satisfaction is as important as their products and services, have helped this establishment garner a vast base of customers, which continues to grow by the day. This business employs individuals that are dedicated towards their respective roles and put in a lot of effort to achieve the common vision and larger goals of the company. In the near future, this business aims to expand its line of products and services and cater to a larger client base. In Lucknow, this establishment occupies a prominent location in Jalvayu Vihar. It is an effortless task in commuting to this establishment as there are various modes of transport readily available. It is known to provide top service in the following categories: Banquet Halls, Auditoriums, Conference Halls, Event Venues, Exhibition Halls, Fair Grounds.

Products and Services offered:
Lucknow Mahotsav Sthal in Jalvayu Vihar has a wide range of products and / or services to cater to the varied requirements of their customers. The staff at this establishment are courteous and prompt at providing any assistance. They readily answer any queries or questions that you may have. This establishment is functional from 06:00 - 01:00.
Please scroll to the top for the address and contact details of Lucknow Mahotsav Sthal at Jalvayu Vihar, Lucknow.

What users liked:ðŸ‘
1. Many customers mentioned that the place is large and has ample space for parking.
2. Some reviews appreciated the cultural diversity showcased in the Lucknow Mahotsav, with stalls from different states of India.
3. Some customers enjoyed the live music played at the event.
4. Some reviews praised the greenery and cleanliness of the park where some events were held.

What can be improved:ðŸ˜Š
1. Few reviews mentioned that there were issues with entry tickets and security arrangements.
2. Some customers complained about high prices of items sold by vendors in comparison to market prices.
3. A few reviews criticized uneven surfaces, overgrown grass, dust, and parking issues.

Services offered:â™¿
-> Wheel Chair Accessible Entrance And Exit.
-> Wheel Chair Accessible In Car Parking.
