Lucknow International Mango Festival: As the name suggests, this festival celebrates the king of fruits, mango. It features various varieties of mangoes, mango-based delicacies, cultural performances, and competitions. The festival is typically held during the mango season, which is from May to July.

The luscious taste of freshly plucked mangoes, the breath-taking view of mango-laden trees, accompanied by the soft, fresh fragrant breeze – visit Vintage Village at Gulripurwa for the Mango Festival this Sunday, 26th June 2022. The event is organised by the Lucknow Farmer’s Market in association with the Awadh Manho Growers Association.

Enjoy the glorious experience of a morning at a mango orchard with celebrity chefs, storytelling, mango-eating competition, orchard walks, tractor rides, mango chutney and pickle competitions, archery, swimming, bullock cart ride, tug of war and many other fun activities on June 26th, from 6 am to 1 pm. This will be followed by a Mango Show on June 28th in collaboration with CISH at Rehmankhera, which includes a Mango Exhibition, Mango Museum, sale of mango by-products, Farmers’ Market, cultural events, mango food festival and more!

It is an opportunity for enthusiastic people of all ages and from all walks of life to come together and connect over a common interest – mangoes! The tour is not just about looking around, but enables visitors to buy directly from the farmers, discover local art, craft & culture.

This is the 10th year of the Mango Festival, which was conceptualised by Jyotsna Kaur Habibullah to connect city dwellers with their roots and experience the joys of being in a mango orchard. The Lucknow Mango Festival is also an attempt to conserve and keep alive traditional varieties of mangoes, and the food culture and crafts associated with it. From a single day event, the Mango Festival has evolved into the Lucknow Farmers Market, which provides an online platform to growers, artisans, farmers and start-ups working on sustainable living solutions, allowing them to connect directly with the consumers.

Known as the king of all fruits, mangoes, aren't just ruling the streets of Lucknow currently but have also taken over the huge, Awadh Shilp Gram! If you are a mango fan too, there is no other place you'd rather be at other than the Mango Festival at Awadh Shilp Gram in the city, where over 800 varieties of the favourite summer fruit are on display.

This exotic Mango Mohotsav also has on sale mango products like cakes, pickles, icecreams and a lot more! So if you identify as mango lover of an extreme proportion and want to learn more about the history and farming of the fruit, head out to the Lucknow Aam Mahotsav now before 7th of July.

The Aam Mahotsav in Lucknow features mango varieties from several states and houses over 100 stalls by local traders, farmers and horticulturists. On display are mangoes and mango saplings from Uttarakhand, Bihar, Madhya Pradesh and Haryana, in addition to Uttar Pradesh, as a representation of pan-India mango produce.

The range here is diverse and unending, starting from Dusshehri, Langra, Safeda Chausa, Amrapali, Bamboo Green to Fazli, Mallika, Krishnabhog, Mohanbhog, Bangalore, Neelam, Kesar, Malihabad Safeda and Tambora varieties.

At least six varieties of Chausa mangoes, namely Gaurjeet, Rataul, Khasulkhas, Gulab Jamun and Jardalu glass mangoes are also part of the display along with peculiar hybrids of Sindhu, Arunika, Pusa and Surya. Colourful mangoes like Huranara, Surkha Matiyara, Yakuti and Gulabkhas add further to its wide banquet.

The festival aims to promote the sale of unknown or unpopular mango varieties and their derived products, among the Lucknow people, boosting sales for farmers across the country. To pack up excitement for the same, the Mango festival is also hosting programmes like Mango Chowk, Mango Bazaar, Ajab-Ajab Mango, Mango Nursery, Mango Dish and Mango Inam and so on.

These events will help channel useful information to concerned departments, scientists, exporters, and makers of mango products, in consultation with mango farmers on all aspects of production, processing, marketing, export and quality enhancement of mangoes. The one stop centre will benefit all those who either wish to start mango farming, or indulge in related business prospects such as making, selling and exporting of mango, mango liquor or mango murabba and even conducting horticulture studies.

Hailing from Nabipanah village of Malihabad, the pavilion of Awadh Mango Growers Horticulture Society at the Lucknow Aam Mahotsav has put up about 246 varieties of mangoes. A particular variant here known as Modi Mango is attracting visitors, for its made by tying Mango to Tukmi in a unique way, said Upendra Kumar Singh. The Modi Mango tree bears a fruit every 12 year, adding the feature of rarity to the fruit too.

Additionally, the Dasheri banging fruit, named after its maturation technique of using state paper, is gaining popularity. Varieties of 'Ambika', 'Arunika' and Pusa Shrestha are also gaining visitors’ interest.

National Award Winner, Horticulturist SC Shukta has also set up here. This features over 178 varieties of mangoes, where the special Maharishi Bhrigu is the centre of attraction. This is a one kilogram single piece that is very juicy and sweet, SC Shukla reportedly said. The display of 'Bhrigu Mango', Narada, Lalima, Seven-inch Lambodar, Surkhapara varieties are further adding an edge to this stall.


Another stall of Central Institute of Horticulture, Rahmankheda is a must-visit stop here. Showcasing about 750 varieties of mangoes, this stall is the talk of the fest for its 'Nawab Us Amdi', Elaichi, Alif Laila, Rogini Zarda that is being liked by all!

The Aam Mahotsav is really a celebration for all mango lovers out there and you can find an array of products made from the fruit. Visitors can indulge in delectable offerings like mango cake and mango sweets and other processed mango products native of MP and Uttarakhand also. Besides products, people and horticulture enthusiasts, who are interested in gardening or starting their own mango farms can also buy saplings and small plants.

Location: Avadh Shilpgram, Amar Shaheed Path, Lucknow

Time: 11 AM to 9 PM

Dates: Till July 7

For those who came in late, 17-18 June 2017 has officially been announced as the Mango Weekend ( for want of a better term) at Ramada Lucknow. The weekend promises to be the ultimate celebration of the King of Fruits, in a multitude of gastronomic avatars, through Saturday and Sunday – holding pride of place for the Saturday Stories and being the centerpiece of delicacies as we celebrate the Father’s Day Brunch on 18 June 2017.

In order to procure the best of mangoes the state offers, the Ramada Lucknow team travelled to Malihabad, which along with Kakori and Mal form the Mango Belt of Uttar Pradesh. The destination was the mango orchards of Bhupendra Singh, popularly known as “Raja Sahab Mall” – the uncrowned Raja of Mangoes.

About the Mangoes of Malihabad
Did you know that India ranks first among world’s mango producing countries, accounting for 52.63 per cent of the total world’s mango production of 19 million tonnes ? Uttar Pradesh has the largest area of 0.27 million hectares under mango, and the major portion of it lie in the mango belt of Uttar Pradesh.

The mango plantations of Malihabad were developed by Pathans, under the royal patronage of the Nawabs of Lucknow. Among the different varieties of mangoes grown in Malihabd, Dussheri is the most popular variety. Besides Dussehri, other varieties of mangoes such as Chausa, Fazli, Lucknowa, Jauhari, Safeda, etc. are also grown here.

The Ramada Lucknow team was warmly welcomed at Raja Saab’s abode, and got to know more about the fabled varieties of mangoes such as the Husenera, Mallika & Gulab Khas that make up for some divine culinary experiences. They also shared notes and tips (some of it completely innovative) that were intended to be a part of the Mango Weekend at Ramada Lucknow.

The team procured the best quality mangoes straight from the mango capital, which would form the central ingredient to the weekend celebration planned at Ramada Lucknow for 17-18 June 2017, both days inclusive.

Mango Festival, platform to increase income of farmers: Yogi
Lucknow, July 14 (UNI) Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath said on Friday that the markets of Europe are waiting for the mangoes of Uttar Pradesh and urged the farmers not to take shortcuts but to focus on quality and prepare products as per the demand of the market. Inaugurating the three-day UP Mango Festival 2023 at Avadh Shilpgram in Lucknow, Yogi said, "In Russia, mangoes are being sold at Rs 800 per kg, but it costs Rs
190 to send mangoes through cargo from here. That means if a farmer exports mangoes to Russia, he will get a net profit of more than Rs 600. We have to take the mangoes from here to every corner of the world. The markets of Europe are waiting for the mangoes from UP." He asked the farmers to avoid shortcuts, prioritise quality, and prepare their products in accordance with market demands. "Our government is working on the Beej Se Bazar Tak' (from seed to market) approach to increase the income of farmers.
The CM said that during the Global Investors Summit, the government sent teams to a number of countries. "We have to explore the global market for horticulture crops, and through Indian Missions abroad, we should organise exhibitions showcasing agricultural products related to UP," he said.
Asserting that the mango festival is a platform to increase the income of farmers, he said, "As per Prime Minister Narendra Modi's intention, the UP government is taking all necessary steps in the interest of the farmers."
Yogi said, "Our government has built four-pack houses in the state. Recently, we got the
opportunity to send two tonnes of mangoes to Dubai from the pack house in Varanasi, and we will have to organise similar program in the pack houses in Saharanpur, Amroha, and Lucknow." He said that in order to bring horticulture crops to the international market, agricultural scientists and officers of the Horticulture Department will need to work together. "Only then will we be able to explore new avenues and give the agricultural and horticultural products of UP a different identity," he said.
Producers, buyers, sellers, and exporters participated in the mango festival. Aligarh's mango buyer, Dr Mobinuddin Khan, said that CM Yogi's effort resulted in a successful Aamras program in Russia's capital, Moscow, last week.
Mango seller Latish Bhatia from Bahrain said that this festival is very important for the mangoes of UP. "We export two to three tonnes of mangoes every week. CM Yogi is constantly trying to give a new identity to the mangoes. This will greatly benefit the mango farmers as well as those doing business with mango products," he said.
Before the programme, Yogi inspected an exhibition showcasing various products made from mangoes and released the souvenir of the Mango Festival 2023. He also felicitated farmers and traders from various districts of the state who have excelled in the field of mango production. 




Website: 
1. https://nowlucknow.com/save-the-date-for-the-lucknow-mango-festival-sunday-june-26/
2. https://www.knocksense.com/lucknow/check-out-all-thats-khaas-at-the-ongoing-mango-festival-in-lucknow
3. https://ramadalucknow.com/2017/06/14/mango-weekend-ramada-lucknow-journey-begins-malihabad/
4. https://www.uniindia.com/news/north/mango-festival-platform-to-increase-income-of-farmers-yogi/3010169.html
