Things to Know About Lucknow, Ancient Indian Heritage City
“Some beautiful paths can’t be discovered without getting lost.” if you believe in the maxim, you need to get lost in order to explore Lucknow, one of the ancient Indian cities. A cultural potboiler of food, music, art, and handicraft, Lucknow is a heritage city dating thousands of years back. The city has become a mine of interesting facts during its journey from the Sultanate Era till the present decade through the British Raj. Indian Eagle collects the most interesting facts of Lucknow to help you get lost in search of more about the city.

Lucknow India, Lucknow tourist attractions, Awadhi cuisine, Lucknow heritage, interesting facts of India, Indian Eagle travel

1 The origin of Lucknow is a myth to the common man. It is traced thousands of years back to the Suryavanshi Dynasty. If age-old legends are to be believed, Lakshmana, who accompanied Lord Rama in exile, was the founder of the ancient city of Lucknow, which was built on and around an elevated piece of land near the Gomati River. Then, it was named Lakshmanpur.

2 Lucknow owes its cultural and historic evolution to the Mughal Empire. Lucknow cradled the dynasty of the Nawabs in the first half of the 18th century when the then Mughal Emperors appointed Nawabs for smooth administration of Awadh.

3 Since the second half of the 18th century, Lucknow had flourished by leaps and bounds in all areas including poetry, music, dance, and others. The regime of the fourth Nawab Asaf-ud-Daula was the golden period of the city.

4 The seat of administration was shifted from Awadh to Lucknow during the British era of India. The city witnessed many uprisings against the British Rule. However, Lucknow was made the capital of Uttar Pradesh after India gained independence in 1947.

5 Lucknow was one of the hotspots of rebellious activities during the Rebellion of 1857, the first war of freedom from the British Rule in India. The fire of the uprising spread from Lucknow to Kanpur and then to Bengal.

6 When the British gained absolute control over Awadh, Sir Henry Lawrence imprisoned the then Nawab Wajid Ali Shah. The nawab was exiled to Calcutta (now Kolkata) in 1856. His wife Begum Hazrat Mahal had to seek shelter in Nepal.

7 In the beginning of the 20th century, Lucknow had lent support to the Khilafat Movement, a political campaign by the Muslim community for separation of an Islamic country out of British India.

8 Lucknow is one of the cultural capitals in North India. The bygone regime of the Nawabs in the city is best remembered for cultural extravagance. The Nawabs of Lucknow were the patrons of art and culture. They patronized not only cultural pursuits like music and dance but also construction of historic monuments which still stand today.

9 It is among the interesting facts of Lucknow that the Turkish architecture has a bearing on the heritage of Lucknow. For instance, the Rumi Darwaza (60 feet high), the historic gateway to the city of Lucknow, is similar to the Gateway to Constantinople. That is why the Rumi Darwaza is nicknamed the Turkish Gateway.

10 Among the tourist attractions of Lucknow, Bara Imambara is a colossal edifice. Bara Imambara houses Asia’s largest hall without any additional support of beams or pillars.  About 22,000 laborers were put to work during construction of this landmark monument.

11 Lucknow heritage is a blend of architectural influences from other countries. The University of Lucknow is inspired by the European architecture. Among the historical palaces, Dilkusha Kothi is an example of English Baroque architecture. It was built as a summer resort by a British resident in 1800.

12 Among the things to see in Lucknow, Bara Imambara and Chhota Imambara are an interface between the Mughal architecture and the Turkish architecture. Lucknow’s La Martiniere College was constructed in the Indo-European style.

13 On its list of tourist attractions, Lucknow boasts a stepwell. Shahi Bavali, the royal well at Bara Imambara, is identical to the stepwells of Rajasthan and Gujarat in construction, not grandeur. A fleet of stairs leads to the well at a depth of several feet, and the well is surrounded by bathrooms on the first and second floors.

14 Lucknow’s Awadhi cuisine is unique to the food culture of India. The Awadhi cuisine of Lucknow is known for multiple varieties of biryani, kebab and bread. Shami Kebab, Galawati Kebab, Kakori Kebab, Seekh Kebab, and Ghutwa Kebab are some of the different flavors of Lucknow food.

15 Lucknow Mahotsava is a popular festival of art and culture in the calendar of Lucknow events. Part of Heritage India tourism, the festival is annually held to promote the city’s art and culture at international levels.

16 Lucknow has been the cradle of Kathak, one of the classical Indian dance forms. Kathak gained popularity under patronage of Wajid Ali Shah, the last Nawab of Awadh. Also, Lucknow is home to Begum Akhtar, an eminent Ghazal singer. The city is the birthplace of a few great Indian musicians: Naushad, Talat Mahmood and Anup Jalota. Legendary Urdu poet Kaifi Azmi and Kathak exponent Birju Maharaj also belong to this city of Nawabs.

17 Lucknow is famous for various types of embroidery work. Chikankari, a 400-year-old embroidery art, is unique to Lucknow, the largest exporter of garments with Chikan embroidery.

18 Lucknow is India’s first ‘CCTV City’. Initially, the cityscape was brought under the surveillance of 4000 CCTV cameras. The number of cameras has been doubled this year. Advanced drones are used to keep a watch on major areas during special occasions.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Interesting Facts about Nawabo Ki Nagri, Lucknow
1. Lucknow's history can be traced back to ancient times. As per a popular legend, the hero of the Ramayana, Ramchandra of Ayodhya, gifted the territory of Lucknow to his brother Lakshmana after he had completed his term of exile in the jungle and conquered Sri Lanka. And so it is believed that the original name of Lucknow was Lakshmanpur, famously known as Lakhanpur or Lachmanpur.

2. The name was acquired as the Nawabs of Lucknow, in reality, the Nawab of Awadh, after the reign of the third Nawab when Lucknow became their capital. It became the cultural capital of North India and its nawabs were best remembered for their refined and extravagant lifestyles. They were patrons of the arts. Under their rule, music and dance flourished. Various monuments were also constructed, including today's, the Bada Imambara, the Chota Imambara, and the Rumi Darwaza. 

3. The city became important in 1528 when it was captured by Babur, who was the first Mughal ruler of India. Under his grandson, Akbar, the city became part of Oudh province. In 1775, Asaf al-Dawlah became the nawab of Oudh (now Ayodhya) and transferred his capital from Faizabad to Lucknow. 

4. In 1857, the Indian Mutiny broke out, Sir Henry Lawrence, the British commissioner, and the European inhabitants of Lucknow were besieged for various months until rescued by British troops. On August 15, 1947, Lucknow became independent from Britain, along with the rest of India. It has been listed as the 17th fastest growing city in India and the 74th in the world.

5. Nawabo ki Nagri is situated at the junction of various roads and rail lines, and Chaudhary Charan Singh International Airport is also located around 10 km southwest of the central city. 

6. Till 1867, Lucknow's Charbagh Railway Station was a large orchard. In 1926, the present building of the station was constructed with domes and minars of Saracan design. The building was constructed in red brick and has a frontage of long verandahs adorned with Mughal arches. It provides an ideal, traditional warm welcome to every visitor. Another thing about this station that attracts is that, viewed from above, it resembles a chessboard with pieces that are engaged in a game.

7. Another attraction of Nawabo Ki Nagri is Ghanta Ghar, which is Husainabad Clock Tower. It was built by Nawab Nasir-ud-din Haider in 1881 for the arrival of Sir George Cooper, who was the first lieutenant governor of the United Provinces of Oudh. It is considered the tallest of all the clock towers in India. It is located adjacent to the Rumi Darwaza.

The design of this structure was done by Roskell Payne. It is 67 metre high and reflects Victorian and Gothic structural designs. The parts of the clock are made up of gunmetal material. Its gigantic pendulum has a length of 14 feet, and the dial of the clock is designed in the shape of a 12-petalled flower with bells around it.

8. Now comes another architectural famous structure the Bhool-Bhulaiyan of Lucknow which is Bada Imam Bara. It is said that its central hall is the largest vaulted chamber in the world. And there is no woodwork in the entire structure except for the galleries in the interior. It is believed that in 1785, the construction of the building started when a devastating famine hit Oudh. At that time, the purpose of the nawab's was to provide employment for the people of the reign for almost a decade while the famine lasted.

It consists of large underground passages that have been blocked up. And the staircase from outside leads to a series of labyrinths known as Bhool-Bhulaiyan. It is a complicated entanglement of zig-zag passages. Inside the compound of Imambara, which consists of the grand Asafi Mosque, Another attraction here is Shahi Baoli.

9. Now comes Lucknow's Race Course (LRC). It was established in 1880 and spread over an area of about 70.22 acres. The racing track is around 3200 metres. It was once the longest course in the country and was also the only track where races were run anticlockwise. Isn't it amazing? In February 1883, the first recorded race was held here, which was the Civil Service Cup Race.

10. Apart from architecture, culture, and sports, the Lucknow-based City Montessori School (CMS) won the Guinness World Record for becoming the "world's largest school" in terms of students. City Montessori School has won the global award for having the largest number of students in 2019–20. 

11. How can we forget the lavish and delicious cuisine and embroidery work of Nawabo Ki Nagri, Lucknow. Some of the famous foods and cuisines of the city are gulnaar kebabs, laknavi biryani, nargisi kofta, pasanda kebabs, patili kebabs, shami kebabs, kormas, etc. On the other hand, some of the popular art and cultural works of Lucknow include chikankari work, jewellery, enamel work, metalware, rock painting, perfumes, etc. Chikankari is one of the important crafts of UP, which entails delicate and traditional hand embroidery. It is mainly practiced in Lucknow.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Stunning architecture, gorgeous garden walks, and tons of charisma – Lucknow is one of the best-loved cities among vacationers heading to India, and for good reason. Whether you head here for the sights or the cuisine, be sure to stock up on some factual titbits before you make tracks. Here are some fun facts about Lucknow worth keeping in mind.

1. It’s a major Indian city.
Lucknow is not just a city, it is the capital city of the Indian state of Uttar Pradesh. It has a rich historical heritage and has been a prominent center of political and cultural activities in North India for centuries.

2. It is linked to the Nawabi culture.
Lucknow is often associated with the refined and sophisticated Nawabi culture. The culture is famous for having flourished during the rule of the Nawabs of Awadh.

3. It has beautiful architecture
The city is also known for its architectural heritage. This includes historic buildings such as Bara Imambara, Rumi Darwaza, and the British Residency. Bara Imambara, built by Nawab Asaf-ud-Daula in 1784, includes a labyrinthine maze called the Bhool-Bhulaiya.

fun facts about Lucknow
Bara Imambara, Machchhi Bhavan, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, India

4. People come here for the delicious food and drink.
Lucknow is famous for its delectable Awadhi cuisine. It is known for dishes like kebab, biryani, and the iconic Lucknowi paan. If you’ve ever sampled Indian food before, this is authentic cuisine that goes beyond the typical takeout! However, be ready to drink plenty of fluids as it’s certainly spicy stuff!

5. It is known as the City of Tehzeeb.
Lucknow is often referred to as the “City of Tehzeeb”. This is due to its polite and courteous way of life. Tehzeeb, in Urdu, roughly translates as “manners,” or “way of life.” It’s a name bestowed upon people as a sign of respect.

6. It is a cultural hub.
Lucknow is considered a center for Urdu language and literature. It has made significant contributions to the development of Urdu poetry and ghazals.

7. Lucknow is a must-visit for fans of greenery.
The city also boasts gorgeous gardens and parks. These include the historic Hazratganj area, which is a popular shopping and leisure destination – great to explore when you’ve had your fill of local cuisine for the day!

8. The city owes a lot to Nawab Wajid Ali Shah.
The last Nawab of Awadh was Wajid Ali Shah. He was a patron of the arts and is credited with contributing to Lucknow’s cultural richness. In fact, there’s a stunning zoological garden here named after him – measuring almost 72 acres, it plays host to hippos, ostriches, rhinos, tigers, and chimps!

9. It’s a highly educated city.
Lucknow is also known for being a prominent educational hub. It boasts popular institutions such as the University of Lucknow, the Indian Institute of Management Lucknow (IIM Lucknow), and King George’s Medical University.

facts on Lucknow
La Martiniere College, Lucknow, India, built in 1836.

10. It’s a city bursting with lots of different festivals!
Lucknow celebrates various festivals throughout the year. These include Diwali, Eid, Holi, and the famous Lucknow Mahotsav, showcasing the region’s arts, crafts, and culture. There’s always likely to be a celebration taking place here regardless of when you go!

11. It is home to the Imambara Walk, too.
Lucknow offers a unique experience with “Imambara Walks”. These are guided tours that take visitors through the historical and cultural landmarks, providing insights into Lucknow’s rich past. Ideal if you’ve never been before and want someone to guide you around the greatest hits of the city!