S. P. Chakravarti was an Indian engineer, researcher, and educator. He was known as the father of electronics and telecommunications engineering in India. He was educated at the University of Lucknow and Imperial College London. Dr. S. P. Chakravarti's bust at the Jabalpur Engineering College (JEC), of which he was the founding Principal. He served as Head of the Electrical engineering department at Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, as the founding Principal of Government Engineering College, Jabalpur, the oldest technical institution in central India, where he established the first Electronics & Telecommunications engineering department of India, and as the first Dean of the Faculties of Engineering of the University of Saugor and the University of Jabalpur. The State Technological University of Madhya Pradesh has instituted a gold medal in his memory. Post retirement from academia, he joined the Defence Research and Development Organisation, in 1959, upon request of the then Defence Minister of India, V K Krishna Menon, as Dy. Chief Scientific Officer. During his tenure at DRDO, he was responsible for the founding of three major research laboratories of DRDO, viz., Electronics and Radar Development Establishment (LRDE) Bengaluru, Defence Electronics Research Laboratory (DLRL) Hyderabad and the Defence Research and Development Laboratory (DRDL) Delhi. He served as the first Director of the Laser Science and Technology Centre (LASTEC) Delhi. He was the National Vice-President of the Institution of Engineers (India) and the Institution of Electronics and Telecommunication Engineers. He was a distinguished fellow of the Indian Academy of Sciences, and the Institution of Electronics and Telecommunication Engineers.





Dalip Kumar Upreti (born 26 January 1958) is an Indian lichenologist. He served as Director and Chief Scientist at CSIR-National Botanical Research Institute, Lucknow during 1988 to 2017. Also, he served as Head of Lichenology and herbarium division. Presently, he is serving as CSIR-Emeritus Scientist in the same division.


He started his career in 1978 at Lucknow University supervised by Dharani Dhar Awasthi, Father of Indian Lichenology. After earning his PhD, he worked as a Research Associate and in 1988, he joined CSIR-National Botanical Research Institute as Scientist-B and led the Lichen Lab. He has superannuated from his service in January 2017. During this tenure, he published more than 60 research articles (including book chapters). He revised the lichen family Cladoniaceae during his doctoral degree. He has described 98 novel species. He has produced more than 35 PhD students; his students have worked in all the aspects of lichens with 400 research articles. He has revised the lichen families such as Pyrenulaceae, Graphidaceae, Teloschistaceae, Lecanoraceae, Parmeliaceae, Usneaceae, etc. Recently, Dr. Upreti received FNASc during the year 2013 for his notable service in the field of Lichenology. Pradeep Kumar Divakar is his first PhD student, who is one of the world's renowned Lichenologists. Dr. Upreti is serving as president of the Indian Lichenological Society.

Dr. D. K. Upreti receives an award from Mr. Prakash Javadekar Hon'ble Minister of Environment and Forests (second last) (during E.K.Janaki Ammal award ceremony). The Janaki Ammal National Award in Plant Taxonomy for the year 2015 was given to Dr. Dalip Kumar Upreti for his work over the last three decades, leading to the establishment of more than 100 new species of lichen to the world and more than 200 species as new records to the lichen flora of India. He has also received Prof. Bashir Ahmad Razi Medal -2006) of the Association for Plant Taxonomy (APT).








Salman Akhtar (born 31 July 1946) is an Indian-American psychoanalyst practicing in the United States. He is an author and Professor of Psychiatry and Human Behavior at Jefferson Medical College in Philadelphia.

Salman Akhtar was born in Khairabad, Uttar Pradesh to Jan Nisar Akhtar, a Bollywood film songwriter and Urdu poet, and Safia Akhtar, a teacher and writer. His grandfather, Muztar Khairabadi, was a poet while his great-great-grandfather, Fazl-e-Haq Khairabadi, was a scholar of Islamic studies and theology and played an important role in the Indian Rebellion of 1857. He is the brother of veteran poet and film lyricist Javed Akhtar and brother-in-law of actress and social activist Shabana Azmi. His son Kabir Akhtar is an American television director and Emmy-nominated editor.

After receiving his M.B.B.S. degree at Aligarh Muslim University's Medical School (JNMC) in India, Salman Akhtar did his internship at Maulana Azad Medical College of the University of Delhi in India. He completed post-graduate medical education in psychiatry at PGIMER Chandigarh under renowned Psychiatrist N. N. Wig. During this time, he wrote a famous article "A phenomenological analysis of symptoms in obsessive-compulsive neurosis". He moved to the United States in 1973 and repeated his psychiatric training at the University of Virginia Medical Center in 1976. He obtained psychoanalytic training from the Philadelphia Psychoanalytic Institute in 1986.

Currently, he is Professor of Psychiatry & Human Behavior at Jefferson Medical College and psychiatrist at the Jefferson University Hospital as well as a Training and Supervising Analyst at the Psychoanalytic Center of Philadelphia. He has served on the editorial boards of the International Journal of Psychoanalysis and the Journal of the American Psychoanalytic Association. Salman Akhtar has authored, edited, or co-edited more than 300 publications, including 100 academic books. He has also served as the Film Review Editor for the International Journal of Psychoanalysis, and is currently serving as the Book Review Editor for the International Journal of Applied Psychoanalytic Studies. He also has published seven collections of poetry and serves as a Scholar-in-Residence at the Inter-Act Theatre Company in Philadelphia.







Herbert Vighnāntaka Günther (17 March 1917 – 11 March 2006) was a German Buddhist philosopher and Professor and Head of the Department of Far Eastern Studies at the University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, Canada. He held this position from the time he left India in 1964.

Early life: Herbert Günther was born in Bremen, Germany, as the only son of Reinhold Günther and his wife. Because he showed a great interest in the Orient from an early age, his father encouraged him to pursue studies in this field. To this end, he began the study of the Chinese language when he was nine. By the time he graduated from high school in 1936, he had also learned the Sanskrit language.

Education and early academia: Günther went to Munich for further study after graduation, earning the Ph.D. degree in 1939. Four years later he received the degree Dr. Phil. Habil. in Vienna. From this beginning, Günther went on to become one of the leading Buddhist scholars of our time. Amongst the most influential of his European mentors were Professor Wilhelm Geiger, a specialist in Pali and Sinhalese, and Walter Wüst – both of Munich. In Vienna, W. Havers was his main teacher. During this time his aptitude for languages manifested itself. In addition to Pali, Sinhalese, Sanskrit, Tibetan, Chinese, Japanese, English, German, Russian, and Hindi, there were those languages he studied 'for enjoyment' – Hebrew, Greek, Latin, Arabic, Spanish, and Italian. He progressed to teaching and taught at Vienna University from 1943 to 1950. Guenther left in 1950, refusing to serve under the rehabilitated ex-Nazi, Erich Frauwallner, whose academic chair had been restored to him.

Travels to India: Günther journeyed to India, where he lived and taught for the next fourteen years. From 1950 to 1958, he was at Lucknow University, where he developed a deep friendship with Kailas Nath Kaul, a naturalist, ethnologist, and philosopher. He then went to the Sanskrit University in Varanasi, where he was Head of the Department of Comparative Philosophy and Buddhist Studies from 1958 to 1963. The following year was spent at the International School of America.

The personal and intellectual encounters Günther had in India and the Himalayan region were to leave a lasting mark, for he was fortunate in studying with many prominent Tibetan and Mongolian lamas. Among encounters of special note were those with the following teachers: the Dalai Lama; Khri-byang Blo-bzang Ye-shes Rin-po-che, tutor to the Dalai Lama; the Incarnate Lama Ka-thog dbon sprul-sku; the Incarnate Lama Dar-mdo-sprul-sku Thub-bstan Ihun-grub legs-bzang of 'Bras sprungs Blo gsal-gling rgyal-rong and Abbot of Budhgaya; the Incarnate Lama Tarthang Tulku (Dar-thang sprul-sku), formerly of Golog Monastery in Tibet and the Sanskrit University in Varanasi, and presently Head Lama of the Tibetan Nyingma Meditation Center and Nyingma Institute in Berkeley.

Family: Throughout his career, he was encouraged and sustained by his wife, Ilse (née Rossrucker) Günther, whom he married in 1944 in Vienna. The Günthers had two daughters: Edith Kimball, now of Stockton, California – a former recipient of the Woodrow Wilson Fellowship and Master of Arts from the University of Saskatchewan; and Nora Günther, who presently studies music at Brandon University, in Brandon, Manitoba. The Günther family has, for many years, enjoyed musical performance – Günther was a flautist, his wife plays the piano, and their daughter Nora plays the viola.

Academic legacy: Günther was a pioneer in addressing contemporary philosophical issues from a deep and learned Buddhist perspective. His work is well known for being difficult to read. Defenders have argued that because both Buddhist and European philosophies have built up rich vocabularies and conceptual systems derived from over the centuries, any attempt at synthesis is necessarily complicated.







Mukesh Chandra Haikerwal AC, a British-Australian medical doctor in Melbourne, served as Federal President of the Australian Medical Association from 2005 to 2007. Recognized for his advocacy, he became a Companion of the Order of Australia in 2011. Haikerwal has championed better working conditions for medical staff and led efforts for adequate protective equipment during the COVID-19 pandemic. Born in Lucknow, India, to Indian-born British parents, he migrated to Australia in 1990 and established a medical practice. Haikerwal holds various positions in medical associations, including chairing the World Medical Association and the Australian Institute of Health and Welfare. He advocates for mental health support for doctors and promotes the responsible use of digital technologies in healthcare. In 2008, Haikerwal survived a brutal assault, undergoing emergency brain surgery and extensive rehabilitation. He received several honors for his contributions to medicine and public health, including the Centenary Medal and Companion of the Order of Australia. Haikerwal is married to Karyn Alexander, also a doctor, and they have three sons.






Sahibzadi Asma Hussain, an Indian fashion designer born in Lucknow, India, hails from the royal family of Awadh and is a descendant of Shuja-ud-Daula. She debuted her first collection in 1994 and established the Asma Hussain Institute of Fashion Technology (AIFT) in Uttar Pradesh the same year, recognized by the Government of India's National Council for Vocational Training. Additionally, she serves as the chairperson and managing director of the Youth Upliftment and Welfare Association (YUWA), an NGO, and operates the Asma Hussain Fashion House (AHFH) in Lucknow. As a member of FDCI, Wills India Fashion Week, she contributes to India's fashion industry. Hussain studied at Aligarh Muslim University and is married to Anis Ansari, with two daughters. The AIFT, inaugurated in 1995 by Motilal Vora, focuses on fashion education and has organized various fashion events. The Fashion House showcases regional handicrafts and ensembles, also serving as a practical learning platform for AIFT students.





Kailas Nath Kaul (1905–1983) was an Indian botanist, agricultural scientist, and world-renowned expert on Arecaceae. He founded India's National Botanical Research Institute and played a crucial role in developing the country's scientific infrastructure. Notable achievements include his work at the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, and the establishment of the National Botanical Research Institute in Lucknow. Kaul's contributions spanned various areas, from botanical surveys across India to the discovery of fresh water aquifers in the Thar Desert. He was instrumental in reclaiming alkaline lands in Uttar Pradesh and promoting science education through initiatives like the Vigyan Mandir scheme. Additionally, Kaul actively participated in the Indian freedom movement, facing imprisonment for his involvement. He hailed from a distinguished family, with connections to prominent figures like Jawaharlal Nehru and Indira Gandhi. Throughout his life, Kaul maintained close relationships with notable scientists and intellectuals worldwide, leaving behind a rich legacy in botanical research and environmental activism.





Gopal Khanna served as the Director of the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality from May 2017 to January 2021. Prior to this, he held various senior policy positions in the administrations of President George W. Bush and Governor Tim Pawlenty. Khanna's tenure as Minnesota's first Chief Information Officer saw significant advancements in technology and government collaboration. He advocated for enhanced cybersecurity and green IT initiatives as the President of the National Association of State CIOs. Khanna's extensive career spans both the public and private sectors, including roles in international technology consulting and insurance. He has been actively engaged in civic and community initiatives and has contributed to fostering trade opportunities between Minnesota and India. Born and raised in India, Khanna pursued his education in both India and the United States, earning a Bachelor's degree from Christ Church College, Kanpur, and an MBA from the University of Maine.






Veena Talwar Oldenburg is a Professor of History at Baruch College and The Graduate Center of the City University of New York. She gained prominence for her extensively reviewed work on Dowry murder. Oldenburg, originally from Lucknow, India, has also resided in Gurgaon, India. She holds a bachelor's degree from Loreto Convent College and an M.A. from the University of Lucknow. Upon immigrating to the United States in 1970, she earned a second master's from the University of Bridgeport, followed by a Ph.D. from the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. Oldenburg has previously taught at Sarah Lawrence College and Columbia University and was honored as a 2016 Fulbright Nehru Senior Scholar.






Anil K. Rajvanshi is an Indian academic and the current director of the Nimbkar Agricultural Research Institute (NARI). Born and raised in Lucknow, India, he has held the directorship of NARI in Maharashtra since 1981. Prior to this role, he served on the faculty at the University of Florida. Rajvanshi boasts over 40 years of experience in renewable energy research, rural and sustainable development, with over 250 publications and 7 patents to his name. He has been honored with numerous awards, including induction into the Solar Hall of Fame (1998), the Jamnalal Bajaj Award in 2001, and the Energy Globe Award in 2004. In 2022, he was bestowed with the Padma Shri, one of India's highest civilian honors.






Maqbool Ahmed Lari (1916–2004) was an Indian businessperson, philanthropist, and Urdu writer, known for founding the All India Mir Academy in Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh. Born in Lar, Uttar Pradesh, Lari migrated to Nepal in 1942, where he worked to improve trade and education, earning the title of Royal Gurkha. Upon returning to India, he actively supported Urdu language initiatives and child education in Uttar Pradesh. He played a key role in preserving the legacy of Urdu poet Mir Taqi Mir and contributed significantly to the establishment of the Lari Cardiology Centre at King George's Medical University in Lucknow. For his contributions, he was honored with the Padma Shri by the Government of India in 1971. Lari passed away in Lucknow in 2004, leaving behind a lasting legacy of philanthropy and educational advancement.







Kalbe Sadiq (1939–2020) was an Indian Islamic scholar born in Lucknow. He received his early education from the Madrasa of Sultan ul Madaris and Nazmia in Lucknow before obtaining a Ph.D. in Arabic Literature from Aligarh Muslim University in 1971.

A multilingual scholar proficient in Arabic, Urdu, Persian, English, and Hindi, Kalbe Sadiq dedicated his life to addressing religious and social issues within the Muslim community. He believed that the key to overcoming the community's backwardness lay in education and knowledge dissemination. To this end, he founded the Tauheedul Muslimeen Trust in 1984, which aimed to provide educational assistance and scholarships to needy students.

Under his leadership, various educational, charitable, and constructive projects were initiated, including Unity College, Unity Mission School, and Unity Industrial Training Center in Lucknow. He also established educational programs, medical centers, and welfare schemes across different cities in Uttar Pradesh.

Kalbe Sadiq's philanthropic efforts extended beyond education to healthcare and cultural preservation. He supported initiatives such as the Hiza Charitable Hospital in Lucknow, the reconstruction of historical sites like the tomb of Urdu elegy writer Hazrat Meer Anees, and the Imam Bargah of Ghufran Maab.

Throughout his life, Kalbe Sadiq held various positions of leadership and advocacy within the Shia community, serving as the President of The Era’s Medical College & Hospital Lucknow and the general secretary of All India Shia Conference, among others. He passed away in 2020 but left behind a legacy of service, education, and compassion for the welfare of others.







Abhishek Shukla is an Indian geriatrician and palliative care physician, known for his expertise in hospice and palliative medicine. He is the Founder and Secretary of Aastha Centre for Geriatric Medicine, Palliative Care Hospital & Hospice, a charitable NGO based in Lucknow. Shukla has received numerous awards and honors for his contributions to healthcare and society, including a national award from the President of India and recognition from Prime Minister Narendra Modi. He has also been awarded fellowships and certificates of excellence for his work in geriatrics and palliative care. Shukla is dedicated to serving senior citizens and providing medical assistance to those in need through his charitable initiatives.






Jan Nisar Akhtar was an Indian poet known for his Urdu ghazals, nazms, and Bollywood lyrics. He was part of the Progressive Writers' Movement and collaborated with renowned music composers in Bollywood. Akhtar's notable works include lyrics for films like Yasmin, CID, and Noorie, as well as poetry collections such as Khak-e-Dil, for which he received the Sahitya Akademi Award in 1976. He was also commissioned by Jawaharlal Nehru to compile Hindustani poetry spanning 300 years. Akhtar's personal life, marked by marriage to Safia, sister of poet Majaz, and later to Khadija Talat, influenced his literary journey. He passed away in 1976, leaving behind a legacy of timeless poetry and film lyrics.








Muzaffar Ali, born on October 21, 1944, in Lucknow, India, is a multifaceted personality known for his contributions to filmmaking, fashion designing, poetry, art, cultural revivalism, and social work. He hails from the princely state of Kotwara in Awadh, where he received his early education at La Martiniere, Lucknow, and later graduated in science from Aligarh Muslim University. Ali started his career in advertising before venturing into filmmaking, with notable works like "Gaman" (1978) and "Umrao Jaan" (1981). Besides filmmaking, he has also made a mark in the fashion industry, co-founding a fashion label with his wife, Meera, in 1990. Ali is married to Meera Ali, and together they have a daughter named Sama, who is also a fashion designer. He has two sons from previous marriages: Murad Ali, a film actor, with his first wife Geeti Sen, and Shaad Ali, a film director, with his second wife, Subhashini Ali. Some of his notable films include "Anjuman" (1986) and "Jaanisaar" (2015).







Naushad Ali, born on December 25, 1919, in Lucknow, India, was a celebrated composer for Hindi films. Widely regarded as one of the greatest music directors of the Indian film industry, he was known for popularizing the use of classical music in films. His illustrious career began with the film "Prem Nagar" in 1940, followed by numerous successes like "Rattan" (1944), which propelled him to the top of the industry. Over the years, he composed music for over 65 films, with many becoming silver, golden, and even diamond jubilee hits. Naushad worked with renowned lyricists and earned accolades such as the Dadasaheb Phalke Award and the Padma Bhushan for his contributions to Indian cinema. He passed away on May 5, 2006, leaving behind a rich legacy of timeless melodies and musical innovation.







Amitabh Bhattacharya, born on November 16, 1976, is a prominent Indian lyricist and playback singer in Bollywood. Rising to fame with the hit song "Emotional Atyachar" from the film Dev.D, he has since established himself as one of the industry's leading lyricists. Known for his smart and impactful lyrics, Bhattacharya has collaborated with renowned music composers like Pritam, A.R. Rahman, Amit Trivedi, and many others. He has penned numerous chart-topping songs, including "Channa Mereya," "Bulleya," "Abhi Mujh Mein Kahin," and "Ae Dil Hai Mushkil." Despite initial struggles, his perseverance and talent eventually led him to become one of Bollywood's most celebrated lyricists, winning several awards, including the National Award for his song "Agar Zindagi" from the film I Am.







Anup Jalota, born on July 29, 1953, is a renowned Indian singer, musician, and actor, primarily known for his contributions to the Bhajan genre of Indian music. He earned the title of "Bhajan Samraat" (Emperor of Bhajans) for his exceptional talent in this field. Jalota's illustrious career has been recognized with numerous accolades, including the prestigious Padma Shri award conferred by the Government of India in 2012.

Born in Nainital, Uttarakhand, Jalota hails from the Sham Chowrasi Gharana of Punjab. He received his education at Lucknow's Bhatkhande Music Institute and began his musical journey as a chorus singer at All India Radio. Over the years, he has mesmerized audiences with his soulful renditions of popular bhajans such as "Aisi Lagi Lagan," "Main Nahi Makhan Khayo," and "Rang De Chunariya."

Apart from his contributions to music, Jalota has also ventured into acting and television presenting. He appeared as a contestant on the reality show Bigg Boss 12, garnering significant attention from the audience.

In his personal life, Jalota has experienced multiple marriages and relationships. Despite facing personal challenges, he has remained dedicated to his craft and continues to enthrall audiences with his musical performances.

Jalota's vast discography includes a diverse range of bhajans and ghazals, showcasing his versatility and mastery over various musical styles. Some of his notable works include "Shree Hanuman Chalisa," "Tum Kya Samjho Tum Kya Jano," and "Chaand Angdaiyaan Le Raha Hai."

Throughout his illustrious career, Anup Jalota has left an indelible mark on the Indian music industry, earning widespread acclaim and adoration for his remarkable talent and contributions to the world of music.





Ranveer Singh Brar, born on February 8, 1978, is an Indian celebrity chef, MasterChef India judge, author, restaurateur, and actor. He gained popularity as a host of television food shows and as a judge on MasterChef India. Brar has set up restaurants in India and abroad, curated menus for various establishments, and has a successful YouTube channel with over 7 million subscribers. He began his culinary journey in Lucknow and later pursued formal education in hotel management. Throughout his career, he has worked at esteemed hotels and restaurants, both in India and internationally. Brar has also ventured into television and digital shows, hosting various cookery shows on channels like Zee Zest. In addition to his culinary endeavors, he has been involved in food conceptualization for restaurants, curated gourmet Indian food for cruise liners, and conducted cooking workshops and demos across India. In September 2023, he opened an Indian restaurant named Kashkan in Dubai Festival City Mall.







Kavi Pradeep, born Ramchandra Narayanji Dwivedi on February 6, 1915, was an Indian poet and songwriter famous for his patriotic composition "Aye Mere Watan Ke Logo," dedicated to soldiers who perished in the Sino-Indian War. He gained recognition with his patriotic lyrics in the film "Bandhan" (1940) and solidified his status with the song "Door Hato Ae Duniya Walo" in "Kismet" (1943), which led him to evade arrest during British rule.

Over five decades, Pradeep penned around 1,700 songs and poems, including hits like "Chal Chal Re Naujawan" (1940) and "Aao Bachcho Tumhein Dikhayen" (1954). In 1958, HMV released an album of 13 songs featuring his lyrics, earning him the title of Rashtrakavi (National Poet).

In 1997, Pradeep received the Dadasaheb Phalke Award, India's highest cinema honor, for his lifetime achievements.

Born in Badnagar, Madhya Pradesh, Pradeep developed a passion for poetry during his university days in Lucknow. He began his film career with "Kangan" (1939) and later wrote popular songs for movies like "Bandhan" and "Kismet." His peak creative period included films like "Nastik" (1954) and "Jagriti" (1954), with timeless compositions like "Upar Gagan Vishal" and "De Dee Hame Azaadi."

Pradeep's patriotic fervor reached new heights during the 1962 Indo-China war when he penned "Aye Mere Watan Ke Logo." Despite offers, he dedicated the royalties to the War Widows Fund, displaying his selfless love for the nation.

He continued to contribute to cinema with films like "Sambandh" (1969) and "Jai Santoshi Maa" (1975). Pradeep's legacy lives on through his timeless compositions, and his family established the Kavi Pradeep Foundation in his memory.

He passed away in Mumbai on December 11, 1998, leaving behind a rich musical heritage and an enduring love for the motherland.









Disha Patani (pronounced [ˈd̪ɪʃa paːʈəˈni]; born 13 June 1992) is an Indian actress who primarily works in Hindi films. Patani began her acting career with the Telugu film Loafer (2015), and had her first Hindi film release with the biopic M.S. Dhoni: The Untold Story (2016), for which she won the IIFA Award for Star Debut of the Year – Female. After appearing in the Chinese action comedy Kung Fu Yoga (2017), Patani has played the leading lady in the films Baaghi 2 (2018), Malang (2020), and Ek Villain Returns (2022). She has appeared in Forbes India's Celebrity 100 list of 2019.

Disha Patani was born on 13 June 1992 in Bareilly, Uttar Pradesh, India. She is from a Rajput Hindu background. Her father, Jagadish Singh Patani, is a police officer and her mother is a health inspector. Her elder sister, Khushboo Patani, is a lieutenant in the Indian Army. She also has a younger brother, Suryansh Patani. She studied engineering at Amity University, Lucknow. She was the first runner-up of Pond's Femina Miss India Indore 2013.

Patani debuted with a Telugu film, Loafer, alongside Varun Tej in 2015. She played the role of Mouni, a girl who runs away from home to escape a forced marriage. In the following year, Disha appeared in a music video, Befikra, along with Tiger Shroff, which was produced by Bhushan Kumar and Krishan Kumar under T-Series and composed by Meet Bros.

Patani found her commercial break with Neeraj Pandey's M.S. Dhoni: The Untold Story, a biographical sports film based on the life story of MS Dhoni, the former captain of the Indian Cricket Team, along with Sushant Singh Rajput and Kiara Advani. She played the role of Priyanka Jha, the girlfriend of MS Dhoni's character who dies in a car accident.

Patani then acted in Baaghi 2 along with Tiger Shroff, a sequel to the 2016 film Baaghi starring Tiger Shroff and Shraddha Kapoor and the second installment of the Baaghi franchise. Produced by Sajid Nadiadwala and directed by Ahmed Khan, Baaghi 2 was released on 30 March 2018 to mixed reviews from critics with praise for its action sequences.

In June 2019, she briefly appeared in the action drama film Bharat starring Salman Khan and Katrina Kaif. She started 2020 with the action thriller release Malang opposite Aditya Roy Kapur also starring Anil Kapoor and Kunal Khemu. In March 2020, she appeared in a song in the film Baaghi 3 starring Tiger Shroff and Shraddha Kapoor, the third installment of the Baaghi franchise.

Patani next appeared in Prabhu Deva's action film Radhe, in which she reunited with Salman Khan this time as his leading lady. In 2022, she starred in Mohit Suri's psychological thriller Ek Villain Returns alongside John Abraham, Tara Sutaria, and Arjun Kapoor.

Patani was placed fifth in the list of most searched celebrities on Google of 2016. She is one of the most followed celebrities on social media with over 57.5 million Instagram followers. In 2019, Patani appeared in Forbes India's Celebrity 100 list, ranking 43rd with an estimated annual income of ₹58.0 million.

Patani has frequently featured in Times' 50 Most Desirable Woman list. She ranked 19th in 2017 and 9th in 2018. Patani was named the Times' Most Desirable Woman in 2019 and ranked 3rd in 2020. Patani is a prominent celebrity endorser for brands and products including Joy personal care, Bata footwears, and Fossil watches. In March 2023, Patani performed in various cities in the United States for "The Entertainers" tour, alongside Akshay Kumar, Mouni Roy, Nora Fatehi, Sonam Bajwa, Aparshakti Khurana, Stebin Ben, and Zahrah S Khan.









Uorfi Javed (born 15 October 1997; formerly Urfi Javed), is an Indian television actress and social media personality. Known for her unique fashion sense and social media presence, Javed began her career with roles in soap operas and rose to fame in 2021 after appearing on Voot's reality show Bigg Boss OTT 1.

Javed was born in a Muslim family in Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh on 15 October 1997. She did her schooling from City Montessori School, Lucknow, and graduated from Amity University, Lucknow in mass communication. She was born to Ifru Javed and Zakiya Sultana and has three sisters, Urusa, Asfi, and Dolly Javed, and a brother named Sameer Aslam. Despite being raised in a conservative Muslim family, Javed has stated that she doesn't believe in Islam or follow any religion. In 2021, she declared that she wouldn't marry a Muslim man and expressed her interest in reading the Bhagavad Gita. Amid a debate over changing the name of her hometown of Lucknow in 2023, Javed tweeted her desire to live in a democratic nation.

In 2022, she announced her name change to Uorfi on social media, following the advice of a numerologist.

In her career, Javed has appeared in several television shows including Bade Bhaiyya Ki Dulhania, Chandra Nandini, Meri Durga, Saat Phero Ki Hera Pherie, Bepannaah, Jiji Maa, Daayan, Yeh Rishta Kya Kehlata Hai, and Kasautii Zindagii Kay. She gained further recognition after participating in Bigg Boss OTT in 2021, where she finished in 13th place.

Javed's fashion sense, characterized by unconventional outfits such as a dress made from a garbage bag, has garnered attention and acclaim. She has been featured in music videos and reality shows like MTV Splitsvilla X4.

In 2023, Javed made headlines when reports emerged that she was detained in Dubai for filming while wearing provocative clothing. However, she clarified that the police had intervened due to a logistics issue, not related to her attire.

Javed's public image has been both praised and criticized, with her fashion choices and social media presence often sparking controversy. Despite this, she remains popular on platforms like Instagram, where she has over four million followers.





Aahana Kumra is an Indian actress known for her versatile roles across television and film.

Born and raised in Lucknow, Kumra developed a passion for acting during her childhood years, which led her to pursue roles in theatre.

Kumra made her television debut in 2013 with the Sony Entertainment Television series Yudh, sharing the screen with legendary actor Amitabh Bachchan. She portrayed a pivotal role as Bachchan's daughter in the 20-episode show. Following this, she took on the lead role in Agent Raghav – Crime Branch, a biweekly television crime thriller series, where she played Agent Trisha Dewan opposite Sharad Kelkar.

Her talent was recognized when she won the Best Actress Award at the Third Moida International Awards for her performance in the short film Siberia. In the same year, Kumra made her Hindi feature film debut in Sona Spa (2013) and ventured into Tulu cinema with Kudla Cafe (2015). She also showcased her hosting skills by anchoring the Pro Kabbadi 2016 series.

In 2017, Kumra delivered a powerful performance in the black comedy film Lipstick Under My Burkha, portraying the character Leela. The following year, she portrayed Priyanka Gandhi in the political biography film The Accidental Prime Minister.









Talat Mahmood (24 February 1924 – 9 May 1998) was an Indian playback singer known for his contributions to Indian film songs and ghazals. Despite attempting a career in acting, he found greater success as a singer. Mahmood received the Padma Bhushan award in 1992 for his contributions to cinematic and ghazal music. He was renowned for his soft and somber ghazals, shaping the modern style of ghazal singing in India during the 1950s and 1960s. Born in Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, Mahmood showed musical talent from a young age, despite his conservative Muslim upbringing where singing was not encouraged. He began his singing career at age 16, gaining recognition for his distinct voice. Moving to Bombay in 1949, Mahmood found success in the Hindi film industry with hits like "Ae dil mujhay aisi jaga le chal." He also acted in over a dozen films before focusing solely on singing. The decline of his film career coincided with changes in music preferences, but Mahmood continued to perform live and record until 1991. He married Latika Mullick in 1951 and had two children. Mahmood was remembered for his gentle nature and impeccable style. He recorded approximately 750 songs in 12 languages over four decades before passing away in 1998. In 2018, a tribute event called Jashn-e-Talat was held in New Delhi to commemorate the 20th anniversary of his death, curated by his grand-niece Sahar Zaman.









Sumona Chakravarti, born on 24 June 1988, is an Indian actress known for her work in Hindi television productions. She gained recognition for her roles in Sony TV's daily soap opera, Bade Achhe Lagte Hain, as well as her appearances on Comedy Nights With Kapil on Colors TV and The Kapil Sharma Show on Sony TV.

Chakravarti began her acting career at the age of 11 with a role in the film Mann (1999), starring Aamir Khan and Manisha Koirala. She subsequently appeared in several television shows before her breakthrough role as Natasha in Bade Achhe Lagte Hain in 2011, produced by Balaji Telefilms.

In 2012, she participated in the comedy show Kahani Comedy Circus Ki on Sony TV with Kapil Sharma, and the duo emerged as winners. This marked the beginning of her professional partnership with Sharma. From June 2013 to January 2016, she portrayed Manju Sharma in Comedy Nights with Kapil, playing the role of Kapil Sharma's wife. She returned to television in 2016 with Sony TV's The Kapil Sharma Show, portraying Sarla Gulati, a woman deeply in love with her neighbor Kapil. The show returned for a second season in 2018, with Chakravarti playing the role of Bhuri.

In addition to her television work, Chakravarti has also appeared in two travel shows: Dubai Diaries and Swiss Made Adventures, both on NDTV Good Times. She served as the host of Dubai Diaries and participated as a contestant exploring Switzerland in Swiss Made Adventures.






Javed Akhtar, born on 17 January 1945, is an Indian screenwriter, lyricist, and poet acclaimed for his contributions to Hindi cinema, having won five National Film Awards and received the Padma Shri in 1999 and the Padma Bhushan in 2007. Rising to fame as part of the renowned duo Salim–Javed, he made a significant impact with his screenplay for the 1973 film Zanjeer, followed by iconic works like Deewaar and Sholay in 1975. Transitioning to lyric writing, he garnered praise with numerous awards for his lyrical compositions. Akhtar has been active in political activism, notably campaigning for the Communist Party of India and serving as a member of parliament in Rajya Sabha. He was honored with the Richard Dawkins Award in 2020 for his contributions to secularism and human rights. Born in 1945 in Gwalior to a family with a rich literary heritage, Akhtar initially pursued a career in scriptwriting in the 1970s, collaborating with Salim Khan. Despite their split in 1982, they left an indelible mark on Indian cinema with successful films like Don and Mr. India. Akhtar, an atheist, has been vocal about his beliefs and has raised his children as atheists as well. He has been married to Shabana Azmi after divorcing his first wife, Honey Irani, with whom he has two children, Farhan Akhtar and Zoya Akhtar. Akhtar's contributions have been recognized with numerous awards, including the Sahitya Akademi Award and an honorary doctorate from Jamia Hamdard University.







Nandini Singh, born on 7 August 1980, is an Indian actress known for her work in both Hindi movies and serials. Beginning her career as a child artist in the 1986 movie Jumbish at the age of six, she later appeared in films like Platform (1993) and Ek Aur Ek Gyarah (2003). Singh gained prominence for her role as Kesar in Ekta Kapoor's popular series Kesar, which aired from 2004 to 2007 on Star Plus, and in another of Kapoor's soap operas, Kkavyanjali (2005). She also starred in the music video "Dekha Hai Teri Aankhon Ko" by Aryans. Singh's most recent film appearance was in the 2015 movie Titoo MBA, where she played the character Simran. She has also made television appearances in shows like Adaalat, Begusarai, Savdhaan India, Code Red Talaash, and Crime Alert. Additionally, she has been featured in music videos such as "Woh Dheere Dheere Mere Dil Mein" and has appeared in films like Platform (1993), Kuch Dil Ne Kaha, Lo Main Aagayaa, and various Kannada movies.









Harjeet Singh "Baba" Sehgal, known as the first Indian rapper, is an Indian entertainer involved in various aspects of the entertainment industry. Born and raised in Lucknow, Sehgal graduated with a B.Tech from G. B. Pant University of Agriculture and Technology, Pantnagar. He gained prominence in the 1990s as part of the Indipop scene, releasing albums like Dilruba (1990), Alibaba (1991), and the hugely successful Thanda Thanda Pani (1992), which sold 5 million cassettes, marking it as the first successful Indian rap album. Sehgal's music career continued with albums like Main Bhi Madonna (1993), Baba Bachao na (1993), and numerous others, where he often wrote the majority of the music himself. He also ventured into acting, making his debut in the Bollywood film Miss 420 (1998), and later appearing in various television shows and films, including Rang Badalti Odhani (2011) and Bank Chor (2016). Sehgal was also a contestant on the reality show Bigg Boss in 2006. In addition to his music and acting career, he has directed music for Bollywood films like Bhoot Unkle (2006) and Nalaik (2005) and anchored TV shows like 'Santa and Banta news unlimited' on Zoom. Sehgal continues to release singles on his YouTube channel "Baba Sehgal Entertainment," covering various topics ranging from humorous to social issues.






Mir Babar Ali Anees, commonly known as Mir Anees, was an Indian Urdu poet born in 1800 in Faizabad. He used his pen name Anees, which means "close friend" or "companion," in his poetry. Anees belonged to a family of poets, with 22 poets listed in his family lineage who contributed to Persian and Urdu literature over three centuries. He gained traditional Shia education and was well-versed in Persian, Arabic, and Sanskrit. Anees's mother served as his greatest inspiration, and he received religious education from both Shia and Sunni scholars. He also had military training and knowledge of weaponry. Anees reached the peak of his reputation in Lucknow and declined invitations to present his work elsewhere. He was known for his prolonged Marsias, although only selected sections are now narrated. Anees was praised for his eloquence and narrative skills, and his Marsiyas are considered the best premodern model of Urdu poetry. He was criticized for playing on religious sentiments, but his work was also admired for its storytelling and historical accuracy. Anees was a pioneer in Rubai, enriching the form with the inclusion of tragic events from Karbala. He is regarded as a master poet alongside figures like Mirza Sauda and Khwaja Mir Dard, and his contributions have had a significant impact on Urdu literature.





Iftikhar Hussain Arif, born on March 21, 1944, is an Urdu poet, scholar, and literary figure from Pakistan, known for his romantic Urdu poetry. He has held prestigious positions such as heading the Pakistan Academy of Letters and the National Language Authority. Arif has been honored with the Hilal-e-Imtiaz, Sitara-e-Imtiaz, and Presidential Pride of Performance awards, the highest literary accolades bestowed by the Government of Pakistan. He pursued his education at the University of Lucknow and later studied journalism at New York University before migrating to Karachi, where he worked as a newscaster for Radio Pakistan and later joined the Pakistan Television Corporation. Arif spent thirteen years in England, working for Urdu Markaz until 1990. He has published three poetry collections: Mehr-i-Doneem (1984), Harf-i-Baryab (1994), and Jahan-e-Maloom. Additionally, Oxford University Press has released an anthology of his translated poetry titled Written in the Season of Fear, with an introduction by poet Harris Khalique. Arif has been recognized with prestigious awards such as the Hilal-i-Imtiaz, Sitara-e-Imtiaz, and Pride of Performance by the President of Pakistan, as well as the Faiz International Award for Poetry from the Aalami Urdu Conference.







Brij Narayan Chakbast, born on January 19, 1882, was an Urdu poet from a Kashmiri Pandit family that settled in North India in the 15th century. Born in Faizabad near Lucknow, Chakbast's father, Pandit Udit Narayan Chakbast, was also a poet and held the position of deputy collector, the highest post for an Indian at that time. After his father's death, the family moved to Lucknow where Chakbast received his education. He later became a successful lawyer, earning his B.A. in 1905 and L.L.B. in 1907 from Canning College, Lucknow. Chakbast married twice, losing his first wife and child in 1906. He actively participated in social and political affairs, advocating for Home Rule and participating in the Home Rule Movement.

Chakbast made significant contributions to Urdu literature, excelling in both poetry and prose. Influenced by poets like Ghalib, Mir Anis, and Aatish, he primarily focused on nazm poetry. His notable works include "Khak-e-Hind," "Gulzar-e-Naseem," "Ramayan ka ek scene," "Nala-e-Dard," "Nala-e-Yaas," and the play "Kamla." His poetry often reflected intense patriotism, a central theme in his works.

Chakbast's premature death at the age of 44 was a great loss to Urdu literature, but his legacy lives on through his exemplary works. His complete collection, "Kulliyate-Chakbast" and "Maqalaat-e-Chakbast," was published posthumously on the poet's birth centenary in 1983, compiled by Kalidas Gupta 'Raza.'

Chakbast's poetry has also been featured in the 2015 film "Masaan," where it is showcased alongside the works of other renowned poets like Basheer Badr, Akbar Allahabadi, Mirza Ghalib, and Dushyant Kumar. This inclusion was a conscious tribute, highlighting the significance of Urdu poetry, particularly among millennial and generation X youngsters in Northern India, especially when in love.









Mirza Salaamat Ali Dabeer, born on August 29, 1803, was a prominent Urdu poet known for his mastery in Marsiya writing, a form of elegiac poetry. He is considered one of the foremost exponents of Marsiya Nigari, along with Mir Anees.

Born in Delhi, Mirza Dabeer began reciting Marsiya from childhood during Muharram gatherings called majalis. He received his early education under the guidance of Mir Muzaffar Husain Zameer. Later, he migrated to Lucknow, where he found a conducive environment to hone his skills in Marsiya writing. Mirza Dabeer was also a scholar of his time, known for his erudition.

Throughout his life, Mirza Dabeer wrote numerous elegies, salams, nauhas, quatrains, and ghazals. His Marsiya compositions are considered exemplary, with his poetic expressions deeply rooted in the tragic events of Karbala. Despite being primarily known for Marsiya, he also dabbled in other forms of Urdu poetry, including salaam and rubai.

Mirza Dabeer's rivalry with Mir Anis, another celebrated Urdu poet known for his Marsiya writing, is widely debated and discussed in Urdu literature. Their rivalry led to the development of two distinct styles of Marsiya writing, with supporters identifying themselves as "Aneesiya" and "Dabeeriya." Despite this rivalry, both poets held each other in high regard, and when Mir Anis passed away in 1874, Mirza Dabeer penned a tribute to him, acknowledging his greatness.

Mirza Salaamat Ali Dabeer's legacy in Urdu literature is significant, particularly in the realm of Marsiya. Along with Mir Anis, he left an indelible mark on Urdu literature, influencing generations of poets who followed. Their contributions to Marsiya elevated the genre to new heights, making it synonymous with their names. Today, Mirza Dabeer's poetry continues to be studied and appreciated for its profound themes and exquisite craftsmanship.





Altaf Fatima (Urdu: الطاف فاطمہ; 10 June 1927 – 29 November 2018) was a Pakistani Urdu novelist, short story writer, and teacher (specializing in Muhammad Iqbal). Born in Lucknow, she moved to Lahore during the Partition, earning MA and BEd from the University of Punjab. Her novel Dastak Na Do ("Do not Knock") is regarded as one of the defining works in the Urdu language, with an adaptation presented on Pakistan television and an abridged translation serialized by the Karachi monthly, Herald. In 2018, Fatima received the KLF Urdu Literature award at the 9th Karachi Literature Festival for her book, Deed Wadeed. She died on 29 November 2018. Her works include novels such as Nishaan-i-Mehfil (1975), Dastak Naa Do (1964), Chalta Musafir (1981), and Khwabgar (2008). She also penned collections of short stories like Woh Jissay chaha gaya(1969), Jab Deewarein Girya Karti Hain (1988), Taar-i-Ankaboot (1990), Deed Wadeed (2017), and Gawahi Akhir e Shab Ki (2018). Fatima's translations encompassed works such as Naghmay ka Qatal (Urdu Translation of Harper Lee's novel To Kill a Mockingbird), Mere Bachay Meri Daulat (Urdu Translation of My Children, My Gold by Debbie Taylor), and more. Her contributions extended to Tanqeed and general literature with titles like Urdu Adab Mein Fann e Sawaneh Nigari ka Irtiqa (1961) and Rozmarra Aadaab (1963).










Dr. Rosie Llewellyn-Jones MBE is a well-known British scholar with expertise on Lucknow and its culture. Based in London, where she worked for the Royal Society for Asian Affairs, Llewellyn-Jones is a regular visitor to Lucknow and has authored several books on the city. Her partner for many years was Lt. General Stanley Menezes of the Indian Army (1942–1980). She was appointed Member of the Order of the British Empire (MBE) in the 2015 New Year Honours for services to the British Association for Cemeteries in South Asia and to British Indian studies.





Asrar-ul-Haq, better known as Majaz Lakhnawi, was an Indian Urdu poet renowned for his romantic and revolutionary poetry, composing ghazals and nazms in Urdu. Born on 19 October 1911 in Rudauli, Ayodhya district, Majaz hailed from a family of modest means. Despite facing a hearing impairment from childhood, he exhibited erratic behavior, earning the nickname "Jaggan Bhaiyya." Majaz's father, Seraj-ul-Haq, a university graduate, provided him with education, but Majaz's interests lay in attending mushairas and music concerts. His academic journey, marked by transfers and financial struggles, eventually led him to Aligarh Muslim University (AMU), where he was influenced by luminaries of Urdu literature and became associated with the Progressive Writers' Movement. Despite financial constraints, he contributed to literary magazines and worked in various editorial roles. Majaz's life was marred by heavy drinking, leading to his tragic demise on 5 December 1955, during the first Students' Urdu Convention in Lucknow. His legacy lives on through his poetry collections like Ahang, Shab-e-tar, and Saaz-e-Nau, as well as through cultural commemorations and adaptations, such as the biographical film "Majaz: Ae Gham-e-Dil Kya Karun" and his poem serving as the anthem for Aligarh Muslim University.







Josh Malihabadi, born Shabbir Hasan Khan, on 5 December 1898, and popularly known as Shayar-e-Inqalab (poet of revolution), was one of the most esteemed Urdu poets during the British India era. Renowned for his liberal values and revolutionary stance, he penned over 100,000 couplets and more than 1,000 rubaiyat throughout his lifetime. His autobiography, "Yaadon ki Barat," is particularly noted for its frank and candid style. Notably, the first Prime Minister of India, Jawaharlal Nehru, held him in high regard and frequently attended the mushairas where Josh performed. Born into an Urdu-speaking Muslim family of Afridi Pashtun origin in Malihabad, he received his early education in various languages at home and later pursued studies at St Peter's College, Agra, and Tagore's university at Shantiniketan. A family legacy of literary prowess inspired his journey into poetry. Josh's involvement in translation work at Osmania University and the founding of the magazine Kaleem marked the beginning of his intellectual and literary activism. Despite facing exile for his criticism of the rulers, he remained steadfast in advocating for India's independence through his writings. He shared close ties with prominent political leaders of the time, especially Nehru. After the partition, Josh migrated to Pakistan in 1956, where he continued his literary endeavors and worked for the promotion of Urdu language. He passed away on 22 February 1982, leaving behind a profound literary legacy. Josh's contributions to Urdu literature and his advocacy for social change continue to inspire generations. Honored with awards such as the Padma Bhushan in India and Hilal-e-Imtiaz in Pakistan, his impact transcends borders and generations, reaffirming his status as one of the most influential poets of the century.






Vinod Mehta, born on 31 May 1941 in Rawalpindi, Punjab, British India, was a prominent Indian journalist, editor, and political commentator. He rose to prominence as the founder editor-in-chief of Outlook magazine from 1995 to 2012, and had held editorial positions at various publications including The Pioneer, The Sunday Observer, The Independent, and The Indian Post. Mehta's early life as an army boy in Lucknow instilled in him a staunch secularist perspective. He ventured into journalism after a series of diverse jobs, ultimately becoming one of India's most influential editors. Despite facing controversies, such as his forced resignation from The Independent newspaper in 1989, Mehta continued to contribute significantly to the media landscape. He authored several books, including biographies of Meena Kumari and Sanjay Gandhi, and published collections of his articles. Mehta's memoir, "Lucknow Boy," offers insights into his personal and professional journey. He was a respected TV panellist and a sought-after commentator on major issues. Mehta's contributions to journalism were recognized with awards such as the Yash Bharti Award by the Government of Uttar Pradesh in 2015. He was praised for his unconventional editorial style and his commitment to journalistic integrity. Vinod Mehta passed away on 8 March 2015 in New Delhi, leaving behind a lasting legacy in Indian journalism.





Mir Muhammad Taqi, also known as Mir Taqi Mir, was an Urdu poet from 18th century Mughal India who played a significant role in shaping the Urdu language. His poetry, characterized by profound grief, reflects his lament over the decline of Delhi. He was a prominent figure in the Delhi School of Urdu ghazal poetry and is celebrated as one of the finest poets in Urdu literature. Mir spent his later years in Lucknow under the patronage of Asaf-ud-Daulah. His autobiography, Zikr-e-Mir, provides insights into his life, though much of it remains speculative due to its lack of chronological sequence. Born in Agra in either August or February 1723, Mir's literary legacy includes numerous works, notably his ghazals and the masnavi Mu'amlat-e-Ishq. He passed away in Lucknow on 20th September 1810.





Syed Sulaiman Nadvi, a renowned Islamic scholar and historian, was born on 22 November 1884 in Desna, Bihar, India. Influenced by Shibli Nomani, he graduated from Darul Uloom Nadwatul Ulama in 1906 and later became an instructor there. Nadvi contributed significantly to Islamic literature with works like "Sirat-un-Nabi" and "Khutbat-e-Madras." He advocated for Hindu-Muslim unity and founded Darul Musannifeen, also known as the Shibli Academy. In 1950, he moved to Pakistan and played a role in advising on Islamic aspects of the country's constitution until his death in Karachi on 22 November 1953. He was honored with a commemorative postage stamp by the Pakistan Post Office in 1992. His literary legacy includes various works such as "Khayyam" and "Seerat-e-Aisha."








Amritlal Nagar, born on 17 August 1916 in Agra, India, was a prominent Hindi writer of the twentieth century. He began his career as an author and journalist but later ventured into the Indian film industry for seven years. However, he realized that a regular job would hinder his literary pursuits, so he devoted himself to freelance writing.

Often hailed as the true literary successor of Premchand, Amritlal Nagar carved out his unique identity as a versatile writer in Indian literature. He was praised for his ability to develop diverse characters in his stories and novels, a skill that set him apart as a significant creative writer.

Nagar's contributions extended beyond literature. He worked as a drama producer in All India Radio and played various roles in cultural and literary organizations. He also made significant contributions to the fields of film, theater, and radio, both as a writer and director.

Throughout his prolific career, Amritlal Nagar received numerous awards and honors, including the Sahitya Akademi Award and the Padma Bhushan, one of India's highest civilian honors. He passed away on 23 February 1990 in Lucknow, leaving behind a rich legacy of literary works across various genres, including novels, short stories, plays, children's literature, translations, memoirs, and essays.






Pandey's literary career spans various genres, including humorous comic poetry (Hasya Kavita), satire (Vyangya), and children's rhymes (Bal Kavita). He is best known for his Hasya Kavita, where he has established a unique style and language.

Born in Ballia, Uttar Pradesh, on 10 October 1954, Suryakumar Pandey completed his education in Lucknow, obtaining a Master's degree in Mathematical Statistics from the University of Lucknow. He then worked in the Health Department of the Uttar Pradesh Government until his retirement in December 2015.

Throughout his life, Pandey has been an active poet and writer. He has performed at numerous Kavi Sammelans (poetry gatherings) across India and globally, with over 4,000 shows to his credit. His performances have garnered him widespread recognition, particularly for his humorous poetry recitations.

Apart from live performances, Pandey has also been associated with television and radio. He has scripted shows, written songs, and recited poetry for channels such as Doordarshan, ABP News, Aaj Tak, and SAB TV. He has made multiple appearances on the popular television show "Wah! Wah! Kya Baat Hai!" on SAB TV.

In addition to his performances, Pandey is a prolific writer with over 25 books to his name in various genres of Hindi literature. Some of his notable works include "Chikne Ghade," "Waah Waah," "Rukawat Ke Liye Khed Hai," and "Meri Priy Bal Kavitayein."

For his significant contributions to Hindi literature, Pandey has received numerous awards and honors, including the Kaka Hathrasi Puraskar, Soor Purskar, Saraswati Sahitya Samman, and the Bhartendu Harishchandra Award from the Government of India. He has also been honored with international awards, such as the International Vyangya Shiromani Samman by the International Hindi Association, Washington, D.C.

Suryakumar Pandey's work continues to entertain and inspire audiences, cementing his legacy as one of the most renowned humorists and poets in Hindi literature.








K. P. Saxena was an esteemed Indian satirist and writer, known for his unique style and prolific contributions to Hindi literature. He hailed from Lucknow and completed his BSc and MSc in Botany from the University of Lucknow. Saxena's literary journey began with his employment at the Indian Railways, where he served while simultaneously establishing himself as a prominent writer for magazines and newspapers.

His foray into writing for television commenced with Doordarshan's renowned serial "Bibi Natiyon Wali." However, it was his vyangya (Hindi satire) articles that garnered him widespread recognition. Saxena's first book of satire, "Koi Patthar Se Na Mare," was published in 1982, marking the beginning of a remarkable literary career.

Saxena's writing style was characterized by its unique blend of humor and social commentary, deeply rooted in the cultural milieu of Lucknow. His narratives often unfolded with anecdotes laden with humor, followed by incisive social messages that prompted introspection. He skillfully employed the Lakhnavi lingo and way of life, endearing himself to readers with phrases like "amaa miyan" and "barkhurdar."

Mirza, Panditji, and Bibi were recurring characters in Saxena's satirical pieces, serving as vehicles through which he critiqued the societal evils around him. The mention of "paan ki gilauri" and "murgha" was integral to his narratives, adding depth and authenticity to his storytelling.

Throughout his illustrious career spanning over five decades, Saxena penned more than 17,000 pieces, establishing himself as a stalwart of Indian satire alongside luminaries like Harishankar Parsai and Sharad Joshi. His demise in 2013 marked the end of an era in Lakhnavi style humor and satire.

In recognition of his immense contribution to Hindi literature, the K.P.Saxena Vyangyakar Samman is awarded annually on his birth anniversary. Saxena's legacy continues to inspire and influence contemporary writers, ensuring that his unique voice and vision endure in the annals of Indian literature.










Srijan Pal Singh is a prominent Indian author, public speaker, and social entrepreneur, known for his significant contributions to various fields including sustainable development, rural empowerment, and youth leadership. Born and raised in Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, Singh's educational background includes a degree in electrical engineering from the Institute of Engineering & Technology, Lucknow, and a management degree from the prestigious Indian Institute of Management Ahmedabad (IIMA).

Singh's career trajectory took a pivotal turn when he had the opportunity to work closely with the former President of India, Dr. A. P. J. Abdul Kalam. Serving as Dr. Kalam's Officer-on-Special-Duty and Advisor for Technology and Policy between 2009 and 2015, Singh was deeply involved in various initiatives aimed at national development, including the renowned "What Can I Give Movement," energy independence projects, and rural development programs.

A prolific author, Singh co-authored several best-selling books with Dr. Kalam, including "Target 3 Billion," "Reignited: Scientific Pathways to a Brighter Future," and "Advantage India: From Challenge to Opportunity." These books offer innovative solutions and insights into sustainable development, technology, and socio-economic progress, reflecting Singh's commitment to addressing pressing global challenges.

In addition to his literary pursuits, Singh is actively involved in social entrepreneurship and policy advocacy. He co-founded initiatives such as the Kalam Foundation and the Mars Mission India Project, demonstrating his dedication to fostering scientific innovation and space exploration among Indian youth.

Singh's contributions extend beyond writing and entrepreneurship; he is also a sought-after public speaker and lecturer, delivering talks on community action, leadership, and development at prestigious institutions like IIMA and Indian Institute of Management Indore. He has been featured at various events including TEDx conferences and the Australia India Youth Dialogue, where he shares his insights on social change and nation-building.

Singh's endeavors in the realm of rural empowerment led to the establishment of initiatives like Barefoot IT and e-Spandana, aimed at leveraging technology to address grassroots challenges and promote citizen engagement in governance.

Recognized for his exceptional leadership and contributions to social service, Singh has received accolades such as the LMA Leadership Award for Innovations by the Lucknow Management Association and the Young Alumni Achievers Award for his outstanding achievements.

Through his multifaceted career spanning literature, entrepreneurship, and public service, Srijan Pal Singh continues to inspire and empower individuals to create positive change in society, embodying the spirit of innovation and social responsibility advocated by his mentor, Dr. A. P. J. Abdul Kalam.







Bhagwati Charan Verma (30 August 1903 – 5 October 1981) was a renowned Hindi author known for his notable works such as "Chitralekha" (1934), which inspired two successful Hindi films, awarded the Sahitya Akademi Award for his epic five-part novel "Bhoole Bisre Chitra" in 1961 and Padma Bhushan in 1971, also serving as a Hindi advisor at All India Radio, Lucknow, and being nominated to the Rajya Sabha in 1978; he passed away on 5 October 1981, commemorated by a park named after him in Safipur, his birthplace.







Yashpal Singh (3 December 1903 – 26 December 1976), a Hindi-language writer, political commentator, socialist, and essayist, hailed from Bhumpal village in British India, with a prolific career spanning various genres including novels, essays, and short stories, notably winning the Hindi Sahitya Akademi Award for his novel "Meri Teri Uski Baat" in 1976, having been actively involved in the Indian independence movement and later facing imprisonment for his revolutionary activities, ultimately becoming a significant figure in Hindi literature celebrated for his Marxist perspective and impactful writings.







Ruchita Misra, an Indian writer and author born and raised in Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, awarded the Awadh Samman in 2012 for her literary contributions, holds an MBA and triple gold medals from the Indian Institute of Foreign Trade, New Delhi, and has penned six books including "The (In)eligible Bachelors," "I Do! Do I?," "Second Chance at Love," "Someone to Love," "Can This Be Love," and "Her One True Love."






Mohsin Zaidi (10 July 1935 – 3 September 2003), an Indian Urdu poet known by his pen name 'Mohsin,' hailed from Bahraich, Uttar Pradesh, celebrated for his ghazals which intricately merged traditional form with innovative ideas, his bureaucratic career spanned the Indian Economic Service, retiring as a senior economist in 1993, and his poetic works include "Shehr-e-Dil," "Rishtah-e-Kalaam," "Mataa-e-Aakhir-e-Shab," "Baab-e-Sukhan," and "Jumbish-e-Nok-e-Qalam."





Intezar Abidi (born 11 July 1976), also known as Bobby, is an Indian politician affiliated with the Bahujan Samaj Party in Uttar Pradesh, hailing from Bahera Sadat village in Fatehpur district, accused in multiple cases including murder, and previously served as a minister in the state government cabinet under Mayawati, heading the UP Kisan Ganna Sansthan, before his arrest in June 2011, holding a BSc and LLB from Shia Degree College and closely associated with Syed Shahenshah Haider Abidi of the Samajwadi Party, notably implicated in the 2009 arson attack on the house of UP State Congress chief Rita Bahuguna, and currently serving as the zonal coordinator of Lucknow and Kanpur zones for the Bahujan Samaj Party.





Rajadhiraj Karan Chand Singh Baba, born on 29 March 1947, is the current Maharaja of Kumaon and an Indian politician who served as a member of the 14th and 15th Lok Sabha of the Parliament of India, representing the Nainital-Udhamsingh Nagar constituency of Uttarakhand and affiliated with the Indian National Congress (INC) political party, holding a degree from St. Joseph's College in Nainital and currently residing in Kashipur Fort, Kashipur.





Begum Hazrat Mahal, also known as the Begum of Awadh, played a leading role in the Indian Rebellion of 1857, becoming the regent of Awadh after her husband's exile and making her son the ruler, though she was later forced to retreat to Nepal where she died in 1879, and her significant role in the rebellion earned her a revered status in post-colonial Indian history, born Mohammadi Khanum in 1820 in Faizabad, she was sold into the royal harem and eventually became the junior wife of the King of Awadh, Wajid Ali Shah, leading the rebellion against the British East India Company alongside supporters and later retreating to Nepal, where she was initially denied asylum but later allowed to stay and ultimately buried in Kathmandu's Jama Masjid grounds, with memorials including a tomb in Kathmandu and honors such as a commemorative stamp issued by the Government of India in 1984 and the Begum Hazrat Mahal National Scholarship for Meritorious Girls implemented through the Maulana Azad Education Foundation by the Ministry of Minority Affairs.






Mirza Wajid Ali Shah, the last King of Awadh, ruled for 9 years until the annexation of his kingdom by the British East India Company in 1856, during which he was known for his patronage of the arts, particularly Kathak dance and Hindustani music, and his efforts to promote literature, contributing extensively to poetry and writing numerous books, with notable works including his autobiographical Huzn-i-Akhtar; following his exile to Calcutta, he recreated a miniature Lucknow in Metiabruz, Kolkata, where he continued his cultural pursuits and maintained a lavish lifestyle, despite his longing for his lost kingdom and people.







Atal Bihari Vajpayee, an eminent Indian politician and poet, served as the 10th Prime Minister of India for three terms. He was a founding member and senior leader of the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) and a member of the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS), a Hindu nationalist organization. Vajpayee's political career spanned over five decades, during which he was elected to the Lok Sabha ten times and served twice in the Rajya Sabha. He played a crucial role in the formation and growth of the BJP, advocating for Hindu nationalism while also moderating the party's stance to appeal to a wider audience. 

During his tenure as Prime Minister, Vajpayee implemented significant domestic economic reforms, encouraged foreign investment, and initiated infrastructural projects like the National Highways Development Project. He also sought to improve diplomatic relations with Pakistan, despite tensions such as the Kargil War. However, his government faced challenges, including the 2001 Indian Parliament attack and the 2002 Gujarat riots, which led to criticism of his handling of communal violence.

After his political career, Vajpayee retired from active politics in 2005 due to health concerns. He remained a respected figure in Indian politics, known for his oratory skills and poetic talents. Vajpayee passed away on August 16, 2018, at the age of 93, leaving behind a legacy of leadership and statesmanship that continues to inspire generations.









Rinku Singh Rajput (born 8 August 1988) is an Indian professional wrestler and former professional baseball player, currently signed to WWE's Raw brand under the ring name Veer Mahaan, as a member of Indus Sher alongside Sanga and Jinder Mahal; Singh gained recognition after winning a pitching contest on the reality TV show "The Million Dollar Arm," becoming the first Indian to play professional baseball, spending several seasons in the minor leagues, and being the subject of the movie "Million Dollar Arm"; growing up in poverty in a rural village in Uttar Pradesh, Singh excelled in sports and eventually won the pitching contest which led to his baseball career; he signed with the Pittsburgh Pirates organization, played in various minor league affiliates, and made history as the first Indian citizen to appear in a professional baseball game in the US; after struggling with injuries, Singh transitioned to professional wrestling, signing with WWE in 2018, where he initially debuted as part of Indus Sher on NXT before eventually aligning with Jinder Mahal on Raw under the ring name Veer Mahaan.







Suresh Raina, an Indian former international cricketer, occasionally served as stand-in captain for the Indian men's national cricket team and for the Chennai Super Kings in the IPL; he was an aggressive left-handed middle-order batsman and occasional off-spin bowler, known for being the first Indian batsman to hit a century in all three formats of international cricket and for his contributions to winning the 2011 Cricket World Cup and the 2013 ICC Champions Trophy; Raina retired from all formats of international cricket on 15 August 2020, and from all forms of cricket including IPL and domestic cricket on 6 September 2022; born in Muradnagar, Uttar Pradesh, Raina attended the Guru Gobind Singh Sports College, Lucknow, and rose to prominence in domestic cricket playing for Uttar Pradesh, making his Ranji Trophy debut at the age of 16; he also had a successful career in the Indian Premier League, playing for the Chennai Super Kings and the Gujarat Lions, and achieving milestones such as being the first player to score 5,000 runs in the IPL and the first Indian player to hit 100 sixes in the IPL; known for his aggressive batting style and exceptional fielding skills, Raina remains a prominent figure in Indian cricket history.

