The Ambedkar Memorial complex is Mayawati’s largest and most ambitious commission. Completed in 2008 at an estimated cost of seven billion rupees, the site spans more than twenty-five acres and is enclosed by a vedika-like fence.[44] It is located at the bottom of a hill, next to the Gomti river and beside a flyover, a strategic location that ensures its visibility. The vast, open, granite-lined courts, which are kept scrupulously clean; prominent ticket booths; and monumental entrance gates invite visitors inside. As they travel through, visitors can read about each structure, figures depicted in the statues, and the BSP, and gaze at images of Mayawati inaugurating the complex in the brochures that are given with the entrance tickets.

There is also an open-air sculpture gallery, whose walls are adorned with high-relief bronze narrative friezes depicting key events from the political careers of Kanshi Ram and Mayawati. In one, they stand side by side on a stage as Kanshi Ram addresses the assembled, cheering, flag-waving crowd. The accompanying Hindi inscription informs viewers that on December 15, 2001, at Lakshman Mela Ground in Lucknow, Kanshi Ram, the founder of the BSP, named Mayawati as his successor (see fig. 5). Another frieze depicts Mayawati feeding cake to a convalescing Kanshi Ram; the inscription states that this happened on the occasion of his seventieth birthday at Batra Hospital in Delhi (fig. 8). The figures are flanked by plants and diminutive statues of the Buddha, again associating Kanshi Ram and Mayawati with Ambedkar and the faith adopted by so many of their community members.
These friezes establish a highly personal, parental relationship between Kanshi Ram and Mayawati. The frieze depicting the rally maps Mayawati’s inheritance of Kanshi Ram’s charisma via his designation, while the frieze of her feeding him suggests that she received his charisma via hereditary descent. Significantly, during Jayalalitha’s campaign for office in the early 1990s, she commissioned cutouts and banners that placed her next to her political mentor, the much-loved Tamil politician, MGR, whose promotion of Jayalaltiha’s career paralleled Kanshi Ram’s promotion of Mayawati. During her campaign, Jayalalitha was depicted attending to MGR like a dutiful daughter, again mapping the transference of charisma from one political generation to the next.[45] It is also worth noting that it remains difficult for women to rise to positions of political authority in South Asia. Thus, nearly all female politicians are initiated into politics by elder male relatives, particularly husbands or fathers. Mayawati and Jayalalitha are notable exceptions, and both use public art to create necessary fictive lineages from their male mentors.

The high degree of detail and photorealism displayed by the friezes and their brief, concise text recall photographs and their text captions in newspapers. If, as Roland Barthes argues, a photograph operates as a “certificate of presence,” proving that what it depicts happened and who it depicts existed,[46] newspaper photographs and their captions are ultimate certificates of presence. Mayawati, whose political and personal life is so frequently the subject of media scrutiny, is surely aware of the power of this form of presentation for its believability. The newspaper format allows her to convey in the most convincing format that certain events occurred and that others did not. The presentation of Mayawati as a nurturing, attentive child who feeds her enfeebled, yet smiling father was probably intended to convey an additional message about the nature of their relationship. Several high-ranking male members of the BSP have publically accused Mayawati of wielding undue influence over Kanshi Ram and holding him hostage in her house after his stroke.[47] The newspaper-photograph-like presentation of the frieze showing her feeding him “proves” otherwise.

The Ambedkar Memorial is dominated by a monumental stupā, measuring approximately two hundred feet in height. As with the pillars and vedekās, the Ambedkar stupā appropriates from, but is not a copy of, any specific Indian monument. The most striking difference between the Great Stupa at Sanchi, and the Ambedkar stupā is that while the former is comprised of solid hemispherical masses that cannot be entered, the latter is architectural, with a domed central chamber. The Ambedkar stupā’s four prominent directional entrances create an imposing, palatial structure. They are accessed by monumental staircases arranged in the form of a lotus blossom, a prominent symbol in Buddhist art.[48] Significantly, the only way to view the stupā’s lotus plan is from the air, which is Mayawati’s exclusive vantage point.

The exterior of the Ambedkar stupā references a glorious ancient dalit past through the appropriation of ancient Indian stupā form and decoration, including blind chandrashala arches (see fig. 7), a monumental chandrashala-arched entrance, and a harmikā (square planned fence on top of stupās). The stupā form has additional, more immediate significance for the dalit community, beyond its antiquity: Ambedkar was cremated and his ashes interred in the Chaitya Bhoomi stupā at Dadar Choupati, Mumbai.

The interior of the Ambedkar stupā is dominated by a twenty-seven-foot-high bronze statue in the round of a seated Ambedkar (fig. 9). Inscribed at the base of the sculpture is the phrase, “My life struggle is my message.” Ambedkar never said this; Mayawati devised the phrase, considering it more appropriate than his more famous, somewhat militant galvanizing slogan, “Educate, Organize, Agitate!”[49] Mayawati’s phrase likely is also a rebuttal to the popular Gandhian phrase, “My life is my message.” Here, the emphasis is on how Ambedkar struggled and overcame (more so than Gandhi), thereby providing a communal model.

Mayawati intended the Ambedkar statue to be modeled on the sculpture of Abraham Lincoln at the Lincoln Memorial in Washington, D.C.[50] The reference is apt. Ambedkar, who was a lawyer, wrote the Indian constitution, and Lincoln, also a lawyer, amended the American constitution to extend rights to all (male) citizens, including African Americans, after the Civil War. Ambedkar frequently likened Indian dalits to African Americans and viewed Lincoln as a champion of the rights of the subalterns in his own nation. Mayawati herself received her LLB and is also an admirer of Lincoln; she sought to link the founder of her movement to a well-known international figure and make the dalits’ struggle universal.

The central statue is ringed by high-relief bronze friezes on the surrounding walls that depict key events from Ambedkar’s life. In one, he sits at a desk, pen in hand, writing the constitution (fig. 10). He is flanked by a map of India, over which is inscribed “Bharat,” and a table bearing a Buddha statue and an Ashokan lion capital, which Ambedkar and Nehru promoted as the national icon of independent India. If the iconography is unclear, a Hindi inscription informs the viewer of the events depicted. In another frieze, the viewer is again informed in text and image that Ambedkar is presenting the constitution to President Rajendra Prasad (fig. 11). They are surmounted by the Ashokan lion capital and the circular-planned Indian Parliament House, which crowns the three figures like an honorific umbrella. The bronze friezes within the stupā also reference Ambedkar’s religious conversion. Wearing monastic robes, Ambedkar stands next to an enshrined image of the Buddha with a monk on the other side (fig. 12). The accompanying inscription informs us that in Nagpur, on October 14, 1956, Ambedkar converted to Buddhism.
Moving in a clockwise direction—the established direction for progressing in Buddhist monuments and thus the logical direction in the Ambedkar stupā—the penultimate frieze offers an aerial view of the sprawling memorial complex (the way Mayawati would view the site from her helicopter), with inscriptions naming each structure. An eleven-foot sculpture in the round of Mayawati stands beside the frieze, emphasizing her role as patron. The cycle concludes with eleven-foot sculptures in the round of Mayawati and Kanshi Ram that flank and gesture toward a bronze frieze of the Ambedkar sculpture enshrined within the stupā (see fig. 4). The inscriptions inform us that Sushrī (Most Honorable) Mayawati, Chief Minister of Uttar Pradesh, laid the foundation for the stupā on August 15, 1995. In publically laying the memorial’s foundation, Mayawati was again participating in an established expression of her charisma, in what Sara Dickey terms Indian “person-centered politics.” Participating in public cornerstone-laying ceremonies amid much fanfare is a common means by which an Indian politician spreads awareness of his or her “person.” [51] The date of the ceremony is also significant, as it was the anniversary of both Ambedkar’s birthday and Indian Independence Day during Mayawati’s first year in office.

The centrally located Ambedkar statue and the friezes highlight Ambedkar’s various achievements. Ultimately, they link him to Mayawati, whose agency in the construction of the very site in which all these sculptures are housed, is underscored at the end of the cycle. Mayawati stands with Kanshi Ram by the bronze frieze depicting the Ambedkar statue, thereby visually mapping the lineage of dalit political power from Ambedkar to Kanshi Ram and finally to herself.

Mayawati also uses the Ambedkar stupā as a stage for performing her political lineage from Ambedkar. In addition to commencing construction at the site on Ambedkar’s birthday and personally laying its foundation stone, Mayawati annually holds ceremonies for Ambedkar’s birthday at the complex. During these events, Mayawati, who is accompanied by throngs of party officials, Buddhist monks, and constituents from throughout the state, publically garlands the main Ambedkar statue and delivers speeches before it.
Built between 2003 and 2005, the Prerna Kendra is a very different type of structure. The Ambedkar Memorial is open, sprawling, and of a monumental scale. By contrast, the far smaller Prerna Kendra is woven into the dense urban fabric of upper-middle-class apartments and shops in a residential area across Lucknow. With its high, battered surrounding walls, which block visibility from the street, and discreet entrance, the Prerna Kendra is evocative of a fortress. The form of the Ambedkar stupā is based on ancient Indian stupās. The formal inspiration for the 105-foot-tall steep pyramidal Prerna Kendra was another well-known Buddhist pilgrimage site, the Mahabodhi Temple in Bodh Gaya. The most important Buddhist pilgrimage site, the temple marks the site of the Buddha’s enlightenment, again linking dalits to their Buddhist past and a wider international Buddhist community.

The intended audiences of the Ambedkar Memorial and the Prerna Kendra are also different. With its entrance fees and well-run infrastructure, the Ambedkar Memorial was intended as public space for members of the upper and middle castes as well as dalits; there Mayawati broadcasts versions of dalit history, the achievements of her community members, and her own charisma to the widest possible audience. The Prerna Kendra’s entrance is discreet, the building’s form is largely obscured by its high outer walls, and the site is frequently closed. It is therefore far less inviting to non-community members.[53]

Mayawati inaugurated the Prerna Kandra in 2005 during a Buddhist ritual performed by monks. Media coverage of the event noted her benevolence to the monks; she gave them large sums of money, fruit, and umbrellas.[54] In demonstrating such largesse, she again used her architectural commission as a stage to perform her political legitimacy. Not only did she ally with the Buddhist monks, most of whom are former dalits, she reminded all that the faith is deeply associated with dalit activism. Moreover, in showing such magnanimity, Mayawati was subscribing to a well-established tradition in Indian rulership: generous support of religious organizations and their monastic members.
Inscriptions on a pyramidal marble block on the ground floor offer excerpts from Kanshi Ram’s will that state he wanted Mayawati to light his pyre and his ashes to be enshrined in the Prerna Kandra. The will also specifies that Kanshi Ram wanted Mayawati’s cremated remains to be enshrined at the site, which will thus transform the Prerna Kendra into a political, dynastic funerary memorial.

In weaving prominent dalit memorials into a land that had denied the community a presence in space, Mayawati demanded to be recognized. Weaving dalit corporeal remains into Lucknow’s urban fabric was an even more assertive gesture. Her sculptural and architectural memorials suggest permanence and, by extension, the irreversible betterment of her community. By interring their ashes in the Prerna Kandra, Kanshi Ram and Mayawati themselves are symbolically eternally present and are always leading their community toward an ever better future. Mayawati was voted out of office in early 2012, but her successor Akhilesh Yadav has affirmed that the new government will not disturb the dalit memorials. This is hardly surprising, given that Mayawati vowed on several occasions that there would be major dalit protests and communal unrest if her memorials were destroyed.[55] Her threat was put to the test immediately after her and Ambedkar’s statues were vandalized; as she had predicted, her community members retaliated by peacefully demonstrating and blocking roads in Lucknow. Images have power, and Mayawati intends to ensure that their messages will be heard for as long as possible.

Kanshi Ram and Mayawati surely would have been aware of the long history and potentially legitimizing messages of funerary memorials in India. In addition to stupās, there are several other types of South Asian funerary memorials. In Islamic India, rulers commissioned lavish, monumental tombs for their late fathers. The formal and decorative programs and construction materials of the Indo-Islamic tombs helped their royal patrons project their own public identities.[56] Rajput and Maratha kings similarly memorialized their predecessors through cenotaphs (chatrīs) with politically charged forms and decoration.[57] By installing Kanshi Ram’s ashes in the Prerna Kendra, Mayawati appropriated an established royal Indic practice of architectural memorialization. Similar to performing a father’s funerary rites, commissioning his memorial is a legitimizing act in India that irrefutably establishes dynastic lineage and the transference of political authority from one generation to the next. Thus, in the Indic context, a funerary memorial is an index not only of absence (of the memorialized deceased) but also of presence and legitimate power (of the memorial’s heir and patron).

Like those of many other notable examples of Indian funerary architecture, the Prerna Kendra’s ultimate message appears to refer more to its patron than the one memorialized. Perhaps even more than the Ambedkar stupā, the sculptural program at the Prerna Kendra asserts Mayawati’s charisma and ability to lead her party. As noted in a lengthy inscription at the site, the urn with Kanshi Ram’s cremated ashes is contained in a marble plinth located in the center of the main chamber on the second floor. The plinth supports three bronze monumental statues in the round. A life-sized Ambedkar is elevated above flanking eighteen-foot statues of Kanshi Ram and Mayawati. The triangular composition, with Ambedkar’s raised position, once again visually reiterates the lineage of charismatic leadership in dalit politics.

The walls of the Prerna Kendra’s chambers, which are spread over three floors, are lined with bronze friezes that feature episodes from Mayawati’s life, with an emphasis on major events in her political career. Over the three levels of the Prerna Kendra, the friezes’ narrative unfolds in a clockwise direction. Mayawati first appears, uncharacteristically in a sari, on a frieze with an inscription noting that it marks her fiftieth birthday and wishing her congratulations. She then appears with her family in a group portrait as a child (fig. 13); she studies for her exams with a Buddha image on her bookshelf; she is sworn in as chief minister (fig. 14); she dines with high-ranking members of government while in close conversation and laughing (fig. 15), clearly accepted by and completely at ease in these circles of power. The friezes also depict Mayawati’s major architectural commissions, again calling attention to her prolific building activity, which has made dalit public presence conspicuous, material, and permanent.
Despite the fact that the Prerna Kendra houses his ashes, Kanshi Ram himself makes few appearances in its friezes. When he is depicted, it is during key events that validate Mayawati’s political power: when he publically declared her as his successor, and when she cared for him during his illness as if she were his child. In fact, Kanshi Ram appears most frequently in the friezes as a corpse and as cremated ashes. Mayawati first mourns over her mentor’s corpse, she lights his pyre, she places the cremated ashes on an altar before the Buddha and finally in the Prerna Kendra (figs. 16, 17). The funerary friezes all carefully record in Hindi that Kanshi Ram’s last rites were done in accordance with his wishes.
The final frieze in the program presents Mayawati in one of her most controversial and well-documented performances of charismatic authority (fig. 18). She is well known and frequently criticized for allowing herself to be festooned with colossal garlands made from countless one thousand rupee notes. Each garland has an estimated value of between $500,000 to $2 million. Since 2010, Mayawati has accepted these money garlands, which the BSP claims represent donations from party members, at public events like political rallies and celebrations of Kanshi Ram’s birthday.[58] In what have become iconic media images, she appears flanked by aides who hoist the cumbersome money garland over her shoulders. Mayawati raises one arm and holds her hand in a gesture that parallels the one displayed by the Ambedkar statues she commissions, again visually linking these two political figures.

Mayawati’s detractors sharply criticize such performances as vulgar and inappropriate, particularly because she claims to represent the poorest and most disadvantaged members of Indian society. Moreover, when she accepted the garlands, she was chief minister of one of the poorest states in the nation. Mayawati herself has remained silent on the subject of the money garlands. However, it is worth considering that, because dalits historically have been denied access to vast sums of money and political authority, their chosen representative’s conspicuous display of both undeniably announces their assertion of their power and defiance in the face of criticism.

In her performances of such conspicuous displays of wealth Mayawati again draws from models of ancient Indic kingship, which are being revived by democratically elected politicians. Weber observed followers’ donations of large sums of cash and luxury items as recognition of their leaders’ charisma.[59] Beyond signifying Mayawati’s wealth and charismatic authority, the money garlands are metonyms that signify the prosperity her community members may now legitimately claim through her leadership. In models of traditional Indic kingship, the ruler’s body and his state were to an extent conflated. It was therefore a royal responsibility to appear in public “in the beauty and dazzle of his person,”[60] to amass wealth, and stage awesome performances of conspicuous consumption to convey the well-being of the state. Established in ancient India, royal acts of conspicuous displays of wealth continued to hold currency into the colonial period. The practice is enjoying a resurgence under Jayalalitha[61] and Mayawati. Indian media frequently covers the spectacular decorations and gifts Jayalalitha’s supporters bestow upon her during public appearances: her route to the venue is bedecked with illuminated triumphal arches, her footpath strewn with flowers and the air perfumed. After mounting a lavishly decorated stage, she is given gold coins, reminiscent of performances of support by subjects to their kings, and a silver-plated scepter, a traditional symbol of kingship in India.[62] Mayawati has claimed that she amasses her personal wealth on behalf of her community, making her ostentatious displays of wealth symbols of dalit pride and empowerment.[63]

That the frieze cycle at the Prerna Kendra concludes with this iconic image of Mayawati’s power, wealth, and charisma is fitting. As with the statues and friezes in the Ambedkar stupā, those in the Prerna Kendra laud the achievements of previous dalit leaders and activists, but ultimately map a trajectory to Mayawati as their rightful heir. Her money garlands announce her charisma and the upward mobility she secures for her community. As with other aspects of her commissions—scale, semantic content of the inscriptions, durability of materials, and overall cost—her money-garland frieze surpasses its models.

