ver the past decade, dozens of large-scale architectural memorials commemorating social reformers associated with India’s historically oppressed “untouchable” (dalit) caste have been built throughout Uttar Pradesh. The memorials were commissioned by the state’s former chief minister, Mayawati, herself a dalit. This essay analyzes intersections of politics, caste, gender, and visibility at two of her memorials in Lucknow—the Ambedkar Memorial and the Prerna Kendra (a crematory memorial). Specifically, the author argues that the forms and decoration of the memorials highlight the absence of earlier dalit leaders and present Mayawati as their legitimate political heir.

Especially in commemorative architecture (monuments, memorials, historic markers, museums), we learn whose histories are legitimate, which narratives are superfluous (or symbolically omitted), or which images are embraced as part of our official, national accounts of origins and destiny. We learn who is allowed to speak for history, who is allowed to speak for “us,” and whose voices will always be considered marginal to the main event.

—Margaret E. Farrar

The past few years have witnessed radical additions to the built environment of Uttar Pradesh (U.P.), India’s largest and most populous state. Dozens of large-scale architectural memorials—enshrining narrative bronze friezes and monumental bronze and marble statues of social reformers associated with the historically oppressed dalit (formerly “untouchable”) caste—have been built in the state capital of Lucknow and in Noida, outside Delhi. These cities are now also punctuated by statues that stand sentinel at crowded intersections, outside government office buildings, and by the side of interstate highways, with smaller cement statues throughout the state’s rural areas. The memorial buildings and statues were commissioned by Mayawati (born 1956), herself a dalit, during her four terms as the U.P. chief minister between 1995 and 2012.[2] Mayawati’s memorials are the most conspicuous expression of establishing dalit visibility in her state. Others include renaming districts and prominent buildings to honor dalit heroes. The sheer number of the memorials, coupled with their monumental scale, arguably make Mayawati the single most prolific architectural patron in India since the British Raj commissioned New Delhi in 1911.

The cast of characters in Mayawati’s sculptural programs includes notable dalits and those who championed the rights of India’s subalterns. Dr. Bhimrao Ambedkar (1891–1956), the dalit founder of the modern anti-caste movement and writer of the Indian constitution, is the best-known public figure in the statue cycles (fig. 1). Others include Jyotirao Phule (1827–1890), a campaigner for the education of women and low castes, and the Buddha, who preached against casteism and whose teachings many dalits have consequently adopted. Statues of Mayawati and Kanshi Ram (1934–2006), her mentor and predecessor in the Bajujan Samaj Party (BSP), are given pride of place in the memorials and often are duplicated several times at each site. With the monuments’ scale, their recognizable architectural forms and decoration, and the ubiquity of the dalit statues, Mayawati’s commissions have made an indelible mark on Uttar Pradesh’s urban fabric.
The memorials aim to empower dalits through twin strategies, which Manuela Ciotti refers to as “presence in space,” and “presence in time,” both of which have been denied to the dalit community for centuries.[3] While the former offers visibility, the latter presents an illustrious dalit history, in which its members may take pride and aspire to a better future. When criticized for such flagrant expenditures, Mayawati consistently asserts that the memorials fulfill a vital social role and give hope and pride to her community.[4] As one dalit member of Mayawati’s cabinet remarked, “The statues have given Dalits a place in the history of this country, nobody can change that.”[5]

Drawing from Foucault’s work on the relationship between space and power, Margaret E. Farrar remarks that those in power construct and reiterate social, political, and economic power structures in the built environment. The situation is circular: power shapes space and vice versa. Space legitimizes and ennobles some groups and excludes, denigrates, and silences others. Commemorative architecture is supremely exclusive and visually amplifies messages of communal belonging or segregation.[6] For centuries in India, dalits have been denied a presence in space and time, both literally and symbolically. This spatial and historical exclusion then perpetuates dalit social marginalization, inside and outside the community. It is therefore not surprising that the territorial claiming of physical space and marking it with dalit historical figures—thereby visually demanding that they are recognized—is an integral component of Mayawati’s radical brand of dalit assertion.

The sprawling Dr. Bhimrao Ambedkar Samajik Parivartan Prateek Sthal (hereafter referred to by its popular name, the Ambedkar Memorial) with its monumental Ambedkar stupā (figs. 1, 2) and the Bahujan Samaj Prerna Kendra (hereafter, Prerna Kendra; fig. 3), both in Lucknow, are Mayawati’s most politically meaningful architectural commissions. The Prerna Kendra is unique in that it is a funerary memorial that enshrines Kanshi Ram’s cremated ashes. In commissioning her predecessor’s memorial, Mayawati was participating in a well-established Indic performance of legitimating political authority. As with her other architectural commissions, the Ambedkar Memorial and Prerna Kendra’s formal and decorative programs, statues, and frieze cycles, as well as the commemorative rituals held at the sites, work in concert to unite dalits in a singular “imagined community” and establish Mayawati as their rightful charismatic leader. Images and text present Mayawati as the political heir to the most celebrated figures in dalit history, designating Ambedkar, Kanshi Ram, and Mayawati as charismatic leaders by referring to models of Indic kingship and linking Mawayawati to more recent examples of gendered authority. I employ the term “charismatic leader” in accordance with Max Weber’s definition:
... a certain quality of an individual personality by virtue of which he is set apart from ordinary men and treated as endowed with supernatural, superhuman, or at least specifically exceptional powers or qualities. These are such as are not accessible to the ordinary person, but are regarded as of divine origin or as exemplary, and on the basis of them, the individual is treaded as a leader....What is alone important is how the individual is actually regarded by those subject to the charismatic authority, by his “followers” or “disciples.”
Significantly, Weber suggests that what matters most is that followers believe a leader possesses exceptional characteristics—not that he or she actually possesses them. Like many leaders who seek to convince their followers of their extraordinariness, Mayawati announces her unique and exceptional powers through monumental public art with straightforward messages and meaningful, archaized styles.

Also pertinent for understanding the artworks in the Ambedkar Memorial and the Prerna Kendra are Weber’s notions about how charisma may be transmitted (“the routinization of charisma”) from one leader to another. These include designation by the previous charismatic leader and being descended from him.[8] Mayawati explicitly references the former and implicitly suggests the latter in the statues and friezes in her buildings. Weber also cites support—followers’ lavish donations and gifts—as a marker of an individual’s charismatic authority,[9] which has parallels in institutions of traditional Indic kingship. Mayawati has been the recipient of extravagant gifts from her constituents, a fact that is highlighted in her commissions.[10]

It is not surprising that Mayawati has invested so heavily in a politically charged visual culture and performances of her own charisma. When she first ran for office, she was an unlikely candidate as chief minister. While she was not the first dalit chief minister in India, she was the first woman from her community to hold the office as well as the youngest in the state. Coupled with her extravagant public displays of wealth and acceptance of gifts from her community, Mayawati’s prolific memorial building activity has consistently garnered her both national criticism and praise. The dalit community itself is divided in its support of her building programs. Many dalits to whom I spoke at her sites unanimously and enthusiastically supported her and echoed her rhetoric of the necessity of her community building program. Both factions have received ample media exposure.
The dalit movement and Mayawati’s political career have been the subject of several recent studies.[12] Nicholas Jaoul[13] and Gary Michael Tartakov[14] examine emerging trends in dalit visual culture, particularly the increasing prevalence of Ambedkar statues in rural Uttar Pradesh. They did not consider Mayawati’s monumental urban statues, presumably because this now statewide phenomenon was only in its nascent stages during the time of their fieldwork. Focusing her analyses on its architectural form and location, Maxine Loynd cogently argues that the Prerna Kendra was created as an intimate, exclusive dalit communal space, quite different from the Ambedkar Memorial.[15] However, Loynd’s study does not consider the building’s mortuary roles and is silent on the subject of its decorative program, whose thematic content highlights Mayawati’s political lineage and charisma. Thus, a critical study of these two buildings, their statues, and friezes within her wider political agenda has yet to be undertaken. Before turning to the memorials themselves, it is pertinent to first briefly consider dalit history and key figures esteemed by the community with whom Mayawati visually associates through her commissions.

Dalit—derived from the Sanskrit and Marathi word meaning “ground down, crushed, destroyed”—is an inclusive term that members of India’s various lowest castes have used to refer to themselves since the early twentieth century. Rebuking the Gandhian term harījān (people of God) as patronizing, Ambedkar defiantly adopted and popularized dalit. Historically dalits’ hereditary occupations, which in Hinduism are associated with caste, have been characterized by literal and ritual pollution. For generations, members of various dalit groups were in contact with corpses (removing dead humans and animals, working with leather, and butchering); served as sweepers; and performed other menial jobs.[16] This pollution is popularly regarded as contagious, leading to forced dalit segregation in their areas of habitation (predominantly in slums), at religious sites, and at water sources. Dalits had no recourse or means to better themselves; until the mid-twentieth century, education was largely denied to them. Numerous social schemes have been implemented since Indian independence in 1947 to rectify this, such as reservations for dalits in schools, universities, government jobs, and political offices. Perhaps the greatest single public triumph for the community was the 1997 democratic election of dalit K. R. Narayanan as president of India. However, while such concessions and appointments have markedly improved the dalits’ opportunities for upward social and financial mobility, they remain among the poorest and most socially marginalized people in the nation.

Sources differ on the roots of this discrimination and precisely how long it has been in effect. Brahmanical texts dating to the first millennium BCE outline the various Hindu castes and note the existence of those outside of the order, who are thus “untouchable.” However, since Ambedkar’s campaigns dating from the 1930s to 1950s, communal pride and assertiveness has grown steadily. A key factor has been the creation of dalit “presence in time” and the construction of an alternative dalit history, which presents the community as the former possessors of wealth, positions of power, and education—the very qualities popular history denies them. According to these new trajectories, in the ancient past, kṣhatryǎs (rulers and warriors of the Hindu caste system) and Brahmans (members of the priestly caste) divested dalits of their lofty positions by treachery and relegated them to the lowest social positions. Whether or not these ancient histories are true is not the point. Explanation, pride, and hope are. These alternative histories offer the community a reason for their present subaltern status, a group of role models, and by extension, a hope that they may achieve equality, if not regain their former status
The BSP has made concerted efforts to increase dalit awareness of key historical community members of whom they can be proud. Figures from the ancient past include sages such as Valmiki, the author of the Ramayana. More recent notable figures include female dalit martial heroes (viranganī) martyred during the 1857 rebellion against the British. The most celebrated contemporary dalit heroes are Ambedkar, Kanshi Ram, and Mayawati. In fact, Mayawati worked closely with Kanshi Ram to fashion her charismatic public image and promote her qualifications to lead the community by visually associating her with both Ambedkar and Kanshi Ram.[18]

Mayawati’s memorial commissions are key strategies in the visual articulation of her political lineage from these two male dalit leaders and her claims to charismatic authority. Her buildings and statues are metaphorical lighthouses and visual rallying points, from which the BSP is able to mobilize the community to vote for their candidates, who then will demand more rights and better opportunities on the dalits’ behalf. These messages are amplified through a scale that is larger than life; through construction from costly, durable materials that are historically associated with royalty and political authority; and finally, through historically meaningful styles.

The tradition of public memorialization through sculptures and public buildings in India began with the British, who installed bronze and marble images of the imperial family and high-ranking Raj civil servants and commissioned buildings such as museums and railway stations in their honor. After independence, colonial statues were largely removed and replaced by ones depicting nationalist heroes, particularly freedom fighters such as Gandhi, the Raṇī of Jhansi, and Bhagat Singh. Public buildings were also renamed, but in honor of figures who were almost exclusively from the higher castes, thereby effectively excluding dalits from Indian postcolonial history and public memorial space. In the early 1960s, Ambedkar joined his upper-caste nationalist cohorts when two public bronze statues of him were erected, one in Mumbai, the other in front of the National Parliament in New Delhi.
These two statues established an Ambedkar iconography: dressed in a suit, tie, and glasses, and holding one hand up with the index finger punctuating the air.[19] The Mumbai statue added the Indian constitution, tucked under Ambedkar’s lowered arm, inscribed with “Bharat” (India) to ensure its meaning (see fig. 1). Both Mayawati’s statues and the smaller-scale cement statues dalits install in their villages and slums are based on these models.[20]

Since Mayawati first came to office in the mid-1990s, public dalit statues, particularly those of Ambedkar, have increased exponentially. Today in Lucknow, Ambedkar has a more conspicuous public presence than Gandhi does. At the main intersection of Hajarat Ganj, a fashionable historic shopping district, an older statue of Gandhi has been joined by a larger and newer Ambedkar companion statue across the street. Such visual one-upping was surely not unintentional. In fact, this is a trope in Mayawati’s commissions, expressed through scale and text. Gandhi and Ambedkar clashed on several occasions over the issue of caste; while opposing inequality, Gandhi maintained that there were social and cultural benefits to the system. Ambedkar campaigned for its abolition. While Gandhi is popularly honored as the father of the nation, dalit activists such as Ambedkar, Kanshi Ram, and particularly Mayawati have publically denounced him on the basis that he did nothing to improve their situation. In memorializing notable figures from her own community through buildings and statues, and renaming districts after them, Mayawati was subscribing to and amplifying performances of autonomy established by the independent nation.
Mayawati’s commissions established iconographies for Kanshi Ram’s and her own images as well (fig. 4). Kanshi Ram is dressed in a casual suit, and Mayawati has cropped hair; a plain, loose-fitting shalwaar kameez; chunky sandals; a prominent wristwatch; and a handbag at her side. Her simple, unadorned appearance depicts her as unfussy and androgynous. The message conveyed is that she is fully capable of negotiating the male-dominated political arena. Her distinctly unfeminine appearance also highlights her unmarried status, and by extension, her complete dedication to the betterment of her community, which she confirms when questioned about her marital status.
Neither Mayawati’s public identity nor her self-promotion of it through monumental images is unique within the visual culture of Indian politics, and there were well-established models available to her all over India. Among these, as Sikata Banerjee documents, are women in the Hindutva movement who, like Mayawati, present themselves as celibate, masculine, and martial to participate in the masculine world of Hindu nationalism.[22] The most common trope of female politician in India is the asexual widow, such as Vijayraje Scindia. Like Mayawati, Hindu nationalist women and Hindu widows who have entered politics wear plain clothing and minimal jewelry and makeup.[23] Perhaps Mayawati’s androgynous dress and physique as well as her statues bear the closest resemblance to those of Jayalalitha Jayaram, the former actress and chief minister of Tamil Nadu, who entered politics and began promoting herself through public art a few years before Mayawati. In many regards, the two politicians have similar careers. Both have backgrounds that do not recommend them for Indian politics (Mayawati as a dalit and Jayalalitha as a former film heroine, a profession widely regarded as immoral for women in India). Both claim to have remained unmarried so that they can dedicate themselves to their political parties. As will be discussed further, two prominent tropes in Jayalalitha’s and Mayawati’s artistic commissions are their descent from their male political mentors and their conspicuous political promotion, which announce their charismatic authority.

Tamil Nadu has a well-established history of male actors who enter into political careers. As Preminda Jacob states in her work on the art of cinema and political advertisements in the state, one of the typical means by which actors-turned-politicians promote themselves is through monumental banners and cutouts (outlines of figures) that are stylistically based on film advertisements.[24] Since the 1980s, Jayalalitha has commissioned more banners and cutouts, which are larger and display more overt political symbolism, than any other politician in the state. Her public image and political advertisements certainly have served her well; Jayalalitha has achieved incredible success, attaining landslide victories in state elections on three occasions. She and her advertisements are well publicized in the Indian media, and Mayawati surely is familiar with them.
Another significant factor to the deconstruction of Mayawati’s public image is that in the 1990s Jayalalitha’s promotional images shifted dramatically in their depictions, changing from her wholesome and feminine film roles to a distinctly androgynous appearance. She now appears in the banners and cutouts with her hair in a tight bun and her fleshy physique concealed in a conservatively draped sari and cape. To shift public focus from her film career, in which her success hinged on her sexuality, to her charismatic authority, Jayalalitha desexed herself.[25] In so doing, she likely provided a model for Mayawati. However, as is typical of Mayawati’s commissions, they surpass their models. The Tamil banners and cutouts are two-dimensional and ephemeral. They are constructed of plywood, supported by bamboo scaffolding, and displayed only for a few weeks. In contrast, Mayawati commissions buildings and statues of durable, luxury materials to convey her wealth and ensure both their permanence and their patron’s public memory.

While Jayalalitha’s androgyny may be attributed to her desire to distance herself from her film-star past in an effort to be taken seriously as a politician, Mayawati had different, yet equally compelling reasons to publically desex herself. In her analysis of gender among scheduled castes,[26] Eva-Maria Hardtman draws attention to the fact that the few low-caste Indian women who rise to positions of political power are subject to intense moral scrutiny by the media, male members of their own political parties, and the entertainment industry.[27] There is far less speculation about the morality of Indian high- and middle-caste female politicians (unless they are former film stars) or male politicians, whatever their caste. Untouchables have popularly been considered impure and their touch defiling. Dalit women have the added stigma of being widely considered immoral and promiscuous.
Hardtman cites the late dalit outlaw-turned-politician Phoolan Devi and Mayawati as examples. Among the multiple atrocities committed against the former was being gang-raped on several occasions and paraded naked, which were then exposed in a book and internationally best-selling film, Bandit Queen, without her permission. Phoolan Devi denounced the film in particular, likening it to being raped again.[29] In 1996 a male politician publically accused Mayawati of engaging in a long-term affair with Kanshi Ram that resulted in a secret love child. The accusation received widespread coverage in the Indian media for several months.[30] It cannot be coincidental that photographs of Mayawati taken until 1997 show her with shoulder-length hair pulled back into a ponytail, wearing a pastel-pink shalwaar kameez or occasionally a sari, and gold jewelry. About a year after the accusation, Mayawati cropped her hair and has since appeared exclusively in a shapeless, cream-colored shalwaar kameez, which is how she is immortalized in her statues. Phoolan Devi and Mayawati are both also well known for their public cursing and for addressing upper-caste males in the derogatory third-person, tu—behaviors associated with low-caste males in India. It would appear that for these two dalit female politicians, androgyny and the adoption of stereotypically low-caste masculine behaviors were protective responses to having their private lives and morality the subject of public consumption.
Mayawati was born into the chamar jatī, one of the lowest dalit subcastes, whose members have historically been tanners. Positive accounts of Mayawati’s biography emphasize her dedication to her studies at a young age and her academic success; her higher degrees include a law degree (LLB). In 1977, she was studying for her civil service examinations when she met Kanshi Ram, who was establishing the BSP at the time. Kanshi Ram groomed Mayawati as a party leader, and in 2001, at a large rally in Lucknow, he named her as his successor as president of the BSP (fig. 5).[31] When he suffered a paralyzing stroke in 2004, he convalesced at Mayawati’s home in Delhi while she personally cared for and fed him. When he died in 2006, as per the tenets of his will, he was cremated in a Buddhist ritual, and Mayawati personally lit his funeral pyre.[32]

In both Hinduism and Buddhism, performance of the last rites is the final responsibility of a father’s eldest son and heir. By taking on this central and traditionally male role in Kanshi Ram’s funeral, Mayawati challenged gender discrimination and decisively established herself as the heir of Kanshi Ram. Her action also suggested a more intimate, familial descent from the founder of the party and, by extension, her inheritance of his charismatic authority through two well-established paths: designation by the previous leader or descent from him. Kanshi Ram’s cremated ashes were placed in an urn, which was processed in a cortege through Lucknow and which Mayawati personally installed under bronze statues of the two of them in the Prerna Kendra.[33] These two acts—Kanshi Ram’s announcement that Mayawati was his successor and her performance of his last rites—irrefutably established her as his heir apparent. The two occasions are also among the most popular subjects in the bronze friezes in Mayawati’s memorials.
That Kanshi Ram specified that he receive his last rites according to Buddhist tradition is also significant. Although neither he nor Mayawati formally converted to the faith, Buddhism has been politically and religiously associated with the dalit movement since Ambedkar’s highly public conversion in 1956. Adding another layer to dalit alternative history, Ambedkar asserted that members of India’s lowest castes were Buddhists who had been ostracized for not accepting Hinduism.[34] Since Ambedkar’s conversion, the faith has undergone a profound revival among dalits, who seek to cast off the stigma of their low status and shun the system that degraded them for centuries. As several dalit Buddhists noted during conversations with me, they subscribe to Ambedkar’s claims and view their conversion as a reconversion to the faith and a reclaiming of their history.[35] Due to the dalit revival of Buddhism; its associations with Ambedkar, the founder of the modern dalit movement; and Ambedkar’s assertions that dalits were previously Buddhists, Mayawati’s dalit memorials quote liberally from ancient Indian Buddhist monuments. Ultimately the neo-Buddhist style of Mayawati’s memorials makes a dalit “presence in time” visual.
“A Modern-day Female Ashoka”: Claiming Dalit Space and Establishing a Dalit Style of Architecture
All of Mayawati’s sculptures are executed by Ram and Anil Sutar, a father-and-son, Noida-based team. Ram Suthar graduated at the top of his class from one of India’s most prestigious art schools, the Sir Jamsetjee Jeejebhoy School of Art, in 1953. Significant to the work he would later do for Mayawati, during the 1950s, Ram Sutar served as modeler for the Department of Archaeology in Aurangabad and restored sculptures in the Ellora and Ajanta caves, which familiarized him with ancient Indian Buddhist art. Since he established his own studio in 1959, Ram Sutar’s national fame has grown steadily. He has been commissioned to cast and carve statues and friezes of a diverse range of public and mythological figures throughout India. Sutar is best known for his bust of Gandhi, which has been recast multiple times and which the government of India has given to numerous countries. In 1995 Sutar was awarded the prestigious Padmashri medal.[36]

Mayawati doubtlessly chose the Sutars for their reputation as the most celebrated sculptors to work in a large scale and for the realism, dynamism, and quality materials that characterize their work. That the Sutars are well known for their sculptures of Hindu subjects and high-caste leaders was probably also attractive. Their past work associated Mayawati and her community with the establishment and the galaxy of national heroes. By retaining their services, she effectively communicated that now dalits too have access to the finest quality materials and the most sought-after artists to memorialize their heroes.

She was an active agent in the construction and dissemination of her public image. The Sutars and Jay Kaktikar, Mayawati’s chief architect, discussed building and decorative styles and their associations with her at great length. She then became highly involved in the design and planning of her commissions.[37] While in office, she frequently toured the building sites from the air in her private helicopter. Her commissions certainly have kept the artists in her employ busy. Both Kaktikar and the Sutars work exclusively for her. When Mayawati first retained the Sutars’ services in the early 2000s, they only employed twenty-four full-time workers in their foundry, and they only worked during the day. When I met the Sutars in August 2011, when Mayawati was still in office, to keep up with her commissions, they had increased their workforce to one hundred during the day and another one hundred at night. Their foundry was open twenty-fours a day, seven days a week. Still, they were backlogged with work for Mayawati.

It was not only the rate of her commissions that kept her artists busy, it was their quality. Kaktikar recounts that Mayawati insisted that her projects be constructed with an aim toward permanence. Her great concern was that after her tenure, her non-dalit successors would raze what she had built. Her fears were certainly well founded. Throughout India memorial statues of Ambedkar and other dalit icons are routinely vandalized—toppled, defaced, or garlanded with rows of shoes, with the aim of insulting them. Only months after she was voted out of office in 2012, statues of Mayawati and Ambedkar were decapitated in Lucknow.[39] In an attempt to ensure that Uttar Pradesh was not subjected to further visual programs to erase the dalits from Lucknow’s built environment, Kaktikar worked with thicker than usual slabs of stone, and the Sutars cast Mayawati’s statues and friezes with extra thick bronze.

Mayawati and Kaktikar devised an instantly recognizable style for her architectural commissions through their formal and decorative programs and construction material. Patron and architect perfectly understood the sociopolitical need not only to build but also to claim space and territorially mark it through a sectarian style of architecture. Mayawati’s buildings draw heavily from ancient Indian Buddhist architecture, as exemplified by sites such as the Great Stupa at Sanchi (circa first century BCE). Kaktikar notes that he and Mayawati intended to appropriate this style. Her buildings are not pastiches. Rather than recreating facsimiles of ancient Buddhist structures, Kaktikar combined select features from notable Indian buildings to associate his patron and her community with politically legitimizing models.

The construction materials are uniform light-pink and red sandstone from Karuli, Rajasthan, and buff-colored sandstone from Chunar, Uttar Pradesh. As with all of her commissions, Mayawati’s choice of materials was well informed and meaningful. Red sandstone and white marble have been the preeminent building materials for royal and government structures in North India since the fourteenth-century Khilji Sultan Ala-ud-din’s commission of the Alai Darwaza at the Qutub complex in Delhi. Following the Khiljis, other Delhi Sultanates, the Mughals, several Rajput dynasties, the British, and finally the independent nation of India employed these building materials for their political structures. Light-pink sandstone is frequently substituted for white marble. Mayawati’s use of these materials brings her into the visual language of North Indian rulership.

Chunar sandstone is deeply associated with the third-century BCE Mauryan emperor Ashoka, who was a great patron of Buddhism and its arts. Ashoka raised freestanding columns carved from Chunar sandstone throughout his vast empire upon which were inscribed edicts. In an effort to associate herself with one of the greatest figures from Buddhist history, Mayawati similarly erected dozens of Chunar sandstone columns on the grounds of her monuments (fig. 6). Her pillars are not facsimiles of the Ashokan pillars. While the former are constructed exclusively of sandstone and present a variety of animals, upturned lotuses, and wheels on their capitals, Mayawati’s pillars are more uniform. Their bronze capitals are capped by wheels borne on the backs of four addorsed elephants. Here, the elephants carry polysemic meanings: they are symbols of Indic authority; are associated with Ashoka, as they are featured on several of his capitals; and are the BSP party symbol. These messages also are carried by the dozens of life-size, carved stone elephants that punctuate the grounds of Mayawati’s buildings. The Ashokan pillars were erected singly, but Mayawati’s are in clusters. Furthermore, Kaktikar notes that, per Mayawati’s orders, her columns are slightly taller than Ashoka’s. The association between Mayawati and Ashoka has not been lost on her community. Biku Chandra Ma, a dalit Buddhist monk at the Dr. Bhimrao Ambedkar Gomti Buddha Vihar, a monastic residence in Lucknow (commissioned by Mayawati), proudly asserted: “Mayawati is just like a modern-day female Ashoka.”[40] Perhaps the message she seeks to deploy through the abundance, more permanent material of bronze, and superior height of her pillars is not simply that she is like the great emperor, but that she has in fact surpassed him.
In likening herself to great leaders from India’s ancient past, Mayawati again subscribes to popular performances of charismatic authority in recent Indian politics. Jawaharlal Nehru, India’s first prime minister, is also known to have emulated Ashoka as a model of Indic sovereignty. He chose icons such as the Ashokan lion capital and the wheel to represent the new independent nation.[41] More recently, in 1995, Jayalalitha erected numerous banners and cutouts of herself surrounded by eminent ancient Tamil leaders at the World Tamil Conference in Thanjavur. In several banners, she appeared next to the most celebrated Chola emperor, Raja Raja I (reigned 985–1015 CE) and images of his monumental Brihadeshvara temple. [42] Like Mayawati’s “Ashokan” pillars, Jayalalitha’s visual propaganda focused on an ancient leader’s monument that signified his glorious rule, constructed a fictive lineage, and presented her own rule as a revival of a Golden Age.[43]

The exterior parameters of Mayawati’s architectural commissions are bound by sandstone railings whose forms and low reliefs of chaitya arches are appropriated from the vedikas (stupā railings) at ancient Buddhist sites such as Sanchi (fig. 7). Because the first phase of construction at the Sanchi Stupa was a Mauryan commission, Mayawati’s railings further her Ashokan associations. Like the pillars, the railings are not copied exactly from their original sources. While ancient Buddhist vedikas offer detailed reliefs of a variety of subjects associated with Buddhism, those at Mayawati’s sites are largely devoid of carvings. Representations of yakshīs (fertile nymphs) and other figures from the Buddhist pantheon and scenes from the jatakas would be inappropriate at the Ambedkar Memorial and the Prerna Kendra. While informed tangentially by Buddhism, the faith and its architectural styles are employed in the service of politics in Mayawati’s commissions. These are not sites built to honor the Buddha. It could even be argued that their ultimate function is not to honor Ambedkar or Kanshi Ram, but Mayawati.
