HealthTokri

Healthtokri Logo | Startups in Lucknow
Founders: Amar Nath Bansal and Praveen Kumar Singh
Building upon the idea of delivering healthcare, fitness and beauty products on time and at a minimal price, HealthTokri is disrupting the conventional way of how pharmaceutical stores across India function. This successful startup in Lucknow is working in conjunction with manufacturers to ensure that 100% genuine products are delivered to the customers. The website sells a plethora of products related to health and fitness. HealthTokri is one of the startups in Lucknow, that is racing towards success.



Keeros

Keeros Logo | Startup Company in Lucknow
Founders: Sachin Sahni and Simran Sahni
Sachin Sahni and Simran Sahni are seasoned professionals in the health and wellness industry with an experience of over 19 years. They noticed that when it came to satisfying their mid-meal hunger pangs, people often went for snacks that were deep-fried, loaded with artificial flavours and extremely unhealthy.

This got them thinking about whether they could come up with healthier alternatives that offered wholesome nutrition. They revisited traditional Indian as well as global superfoods and began experimenting, gaining experience. It all came to fruition with Keeros, a brand of Healthy for All, Safe for Diabetics Roasted Supersnacks. It received funds of USD 438K from Venture Catalysts, Ravinder Singh, Saurav Dasgupta and other investors.

Eduace

Eduace Logo | Lucknow based Startups
Founders: Gaurav Yadav and Kalpana Singh
Having set up a huge network encompassing 2,500 plus schools across India, EduAce focuses on quizzing as a source for learning. This successful startup in Lucknow has a flagship program, known as School Quiz League – Pratibha Ki Khoj, is now widely recognized by students in Indian Schools. Moreover, EduAce emphasizes teaching values such as ‘general awareness’ and ‘life skills’ through quizzing.



Nextec Lifesciences

Nextec Lifesciences Logo | Lucknow Startups
Founders: Dr Ranjana Srivastava, Prof. B.S. Srivastava
Founded in 2012, Nextec Lifescience is based in the beautiful Indian subcontinent focusing on a multitude of biomedical research applications and products. Its focus is on development of diagnostic assays for infectious diseases, biomarkers and diagnostic/ sreening assays for lifestyle related and life threatening diseases, Biosensors , newer screening system solutions for novel antimicrobials, anticancer and against other diseases. It is founded by a team of scientists who strongly believe in education, training and community outreach. Nextec Lifesciences provides consultancy to biotech and non-profits and custom courses designed on policy, biosafety and regulatory issues. Nextec Lifesciences is actively developing outreach programs for villages in healthcare education and plan to organize screening camps for lifestyle and life threatening diseases and invite NGOs to form alliances.

TechEagle

Techeagle Logo | Lucknow based Startups
Founder: Vikram Singh Meena
Dealing with the UAV/Drone industry, this promising and successful startup in Lucknow aims to build up the knowledge and expertise of the Indian youth related to drone technology. Interested individuals can learn through UAV manufacturing and training courses, specifically designed to establish oneself in the bright and prosperous drone industry in India. TechEagle with its innovation at the right place is boosting business as well as creating a leap towards teaching Indian youth. TechEagle was acquired by Zomato in December of 2018.

Haxtax
Haxtax Logo
Haxtax Logo | Startup Company in Lucknow
Founder: Anubhav Pandit
When it comes to resolving tax related queries, one needs to rely on the right person for this job. And the advent of GST hasn’t made life simpler (well, that’s a matter of ongoing debate)! This is where this successful startup in Lucknow comes into the picture. With expertise in income tax related manners, filings, legal services such as RERA litigation, and cloud-based accounting software to help with GST returns, Haxtax is like a bottle of water in the scorching heat; it makes life easy and convenient. Although, it is successfully thriving towards best accounting solution.



InMotion

InMotion Logo | Startup Company in Lucknow 
Founders: Durgesh Nandan and Saurabh Jaiswal
InMotion strives to make life easier for the auto-rickshaw drivers by setting up booths known as ‘Bachat Mitra’ kiosks across strategic locations. This successful startup in Lucknow provides a platform for auto-rickshaw drivers for seeking assistance in matters of education, healthcare, insurance, loans and welfare schemes. The setup is progressing rapidly and has now grown beyond Lucknow to Delhi. This startup is successfully educating to boost up literacy among auto-rickshaw drivers in Lucknow.



Knocksense
Knocksense Logo
Knocksense Logo | Startup Company in Lucknow
Knocksense is a digital platform. It produces visually-appealing content on cities and topics, which are generally left uncovered by mainstream media houses. Currently Knocksense writes about Travel, Food, Technology, Shopping, Humour, Short films, Lifestyle and latest viral stories from around the country. Knocksense blends video, audio, photograph and written material on one single platform and offers a modern way of information consumption.

Blazing Star Softech Pvt Ltd.

Blazing Star Softech Logo | IT Company in Lucknow
Founders: Mr. Brijesh Kumar Singh & Mr. Balawant Kumar Singh
Founded in 2013, Blazing Star Softech is a joint initiative of Mr. Brijesh Kumar Singh & Mr. Balawant Kumar Singh. It is a positive step towards the web development , programming and training of soft skills. The company works in the IT field to act as a reliable association for software developments, web developments , programming and also conducts workshops and seminars to develop a good set of skills in the youngsters.

Sevamob

Sevamob Logo | Healthtech Startup in Lucknow
Founder: Shelley Saxena
Founded in 2012, Sevamob is fundamentally transforming primary healthcare in India through mobile clinics and a tele-health marketplace. It provides a 24/7 call center for accurate diagnosis and treatment and leverages cloud-based mobile technology and data analytics to manage and monitor health outcomes. It provides services ranging from dental care and treatment, ENT, dengue, malaria, hemoglobin, diabetes, urine analysis, and more. It provides vans that comes with doctors and accredited professionals to carry out tests. It has received funds of USD 203K from ADAP, Artha Venture Challenge, D3Jubilee and other investors.

Singsys

Singsys Logo | Software Startup in Lucknow
With offices in Lucknow and Singapore, Singsys deals in cloud consultancy, mobile and web app development, and digital marketing. Having many Fortune 500 clients, Singsys has more than 200 professionals skilled in domains such as UI/UX development, and mobile/web app designing. Singsys is easing tech development for startups in Lucknow for further success.

A2 Cricket
A2 Cricket Logo
A2 Cricket Logo | Manufacturing Startup Company in Lucknow
Founders: Arindam Aggarwal
Cricket is the most revered sport in the Indian subcontinent. Every gully, nukad, and mohalla in India is beaming with wannabe cricketers with the ultimate aim to play for the nation. Both professional and amateur cricketers and in fact, teenagers want to play with the best cricket equipment.  To cater to the needs of those who appreciate the craftsmanship involving cricket bats. Arindam Aggarwal, a University of Bristol graduate, who loves and plays cricket at various positions, decided to create India’s first brand providing bats, manufactured using A-Grade Willow. Customers can place orders for custom cricket bats and can select from a variety of products available on their website. Cricket lovers surely need to look out for this startup! A2 Cricket is a startup in Lucknow giving wings to budding cricketers to play for the nation.

Vortex Global Services
Vortex Global Services logo
Vortex Global Services logo | Startup in Lucknow
Founders: Ramish Zaidi
Have you heard of ‘web properties’? Ramish Zaidi came up with Vortex, which in addition to being a web design and development company, also maintains its presence on the internet through assets such as SimpliCV and KwikJobz.
The company’s services are particularly useful for small and medium enterprises (SME). Moreover, this startup has successfully eased MSMEs presence in Lucknow.



NotNul
NotNul Logo
NotNul Logo | Startup in Lucknow
Founder: Neelabh Srivastav
If newspapers such as Amar Ujala and Dainik Jagran praise your idea, it ought to have some substance behind it. NotNul is an initiative making books, magazines, study materials and what not available in E-book format on the web platform. This successful startup in Lucknow is striving to make Indian literature available to all, for a nominal amount. NotNul, with its digitization effort at the right place is minimising deforestation.

EduGorilla

Founder: Rohit Manglik
EduGorilla is an edtech startup company in Lucknow. EduGorilla provides Online Mock Tests with an emphasis on State Competitive Exams in several vernacular languages. The company services a demand in a market that is highly unorganized, and unpredictable via a comprehensive app and website. EduGorilla has overcome the three significant roadblocks facing State Level Competitive Exams, enabling its consumer to access test series within 4 days of a new exam notification.

Shut Down Startups
Estandardz
Estandardz logo
Estandardz Logo | Startup in Lucknow
The restaurant business is one of the most lucrative ones out there. Apart from the food, the ambiance and layout of the restaurant play a decisive role in either attracting customers or at the same time, repelling them. Estandardz is an initiative specializing in hospitality solutions; it deals in concept development, menu conception, kitchen and bar designing, communication and publicity strategies and a whole lot of other services. For budding entrepreneurs planning to set foot in the hospitality industry especially the food business, this startup is the right tool to analyze and evaluate investment opportunities! Estandardz has expanded to many states of India and some other countries as well. They are doing well all around the corner.